he didn't sit down with the head of
Panama to discuss the canal or the head
of Denmark to disc he announced he
announced and he's made a career out of
being the Naughty Boy and the working
class loves it because they felt
abandoned which they had been the
Democrats are as responsible for Mr
Trump as anybody else and Mr Trump won
because he managed this symbolism very
well I am naughty I am not of that
establishment I hate them like you
do we last spoke on the show a few
months ago just before the 2024 election
and at the time the crucial word you
used to describe Donald Trump was
irrelevant
and I believe you should correct me if
I'm mistaken that the point there was
that he was just going to be some sort
of blip in history and I'm wondering if
now in
2025 you're still feeling that he's
irrelevant yep I am I don't think
that uh I don't think he has a clue I'm
I'm mostly Amazed by the
collection of people he has brought with
him because I don't I wait for somebody
in that group and that that may still
emerge but I wait for
somebody
who seems to me at least to have a
sense of a
strategic perspective that understands
the basic
problems and comes up with a plan of how
to deal with it I'm not expecting a plan
that's foolproof a plan that can't fail
nothing like that but just a kind of
coherent assessment of what the problems
are connected to a coherent plan the the
economic problems faced by the United
States now are
incredible in their
multiplicity in the their seriousness in
how many of the problems have not been
addressed for a long time
uh but I don't see other than verbiage
the verbiage is endless sort of an
explosion of verbiage but I don't see it
so I don't think whatever he does is
going to make much of a difference to
what's going on here and there will have
impact horrible in some cases perhaps
beneficial in others but as a
comprehensive assessment of the problem
and the strategy well I don't see it and
so I my conclusion is that the hodge
podge of policies and that's what it is
a hodge podge of mutually
contradictory weird
proposals that are much
more two things continuations of what
worked for him as a
candidate plus doubling
down on where he got himself into
trouble seems to if I can discern a
strategy that's it what worked to get me
in should work to keep me going a big
mistake and doubling down where I didn't
succeed before or where I've been P got
push back doesn't strike me as a
brilliant move either it's a kind of
mechanical response to somebody who
hopes that this approach will somehow
work people have been asking me and and
the image I like is Donald Trump was
told that there is this thing in
football called a Hail Mary pass that's
when the the quarterback in a tough
situation just leans back and Hees the
ball downfield as far as possible tells
his uh Confederates on the team those
that are responsible go into this
direction go to the left corner
let's hope you're where the ball comes
down or where it bounces into your and
you know sometimes that works is it
possible that what Mr Trump does will
actually produce the outcome he tells us
it will sure it's it's not a zero
possibility but then we don't miss Mr
Trump because that's almost true for
anybody who would certainly would have
been true for Mr Biden or kamla Harris
or anybody else it's not a coherent and
I'd be glad to explain how and why that
is but it
is it's a strange
amalgam of
contradictions and the only reason I
have to say that is
because the media in this country want
to give him as a new president or a
returned president the benefit of the
doubt or maybe some leway or the first
100 days this and so they don't do
what they should do I think that will
change as the impacts of what he does
become clearer but for the moment no you
said a lot of things that I want to get
back to such as this hodg podge of
strategies and and his cabinet picks but
was stepping back for a moment one of
the things that I've really come to
enjoy doing on the show Even though many
listeners seem to hate it is discuss
both sides of an issue and so my last
interview was with Victor Davis Hansen
of the Hoover institution and we talked
about Trump and the election and what to
expect going forward and that's one of
the topics that you and I are going to
discuss before I tell you some of the
things he thought which I expect you
might disagree with I would hope so I am
curious to hear why you think after the
fact now Trump won the election and
Harris lost Harris made a strategic
choice to be the
continuation of Joe Biden I understand
what many of the considerations were
that led her to make that decision and
when I say her I mean the Entourage
around her that helps her make strategic
decisions uh which all candidates have
and I think you know if I had to pick a
single thing what the American people
want is change an awful lot of them want
change and Mr Trump not by the programs
he comes up with so much but the Bluster
the The Bullying the the over-the-top
language the the endless
symbolism and so conla Harris undercuts
this
by in insisting Under Pressure that she
is the continuation of Joseph Biden that
was a mistake Biden was nothing Biden
was same old same old you know B and by
that I don't mean Democrat you know it's
like George Bush or Clinton or Obama
it's just it's it's
what a majority of Americans in
different ways and for different reasons
they don't want more of that they want
something than else and I think you know
in a country like ours which has its
cold war Legacy which I would Define as
follows a liberal
consensus on both sides the kind of
moderate Republicans and the usual
Democrats um moving steadily to the
right both of them in the aftermath of
the Great Depression in a program I
would call the UN doing of the New Deal
which they did
together um what the lesson was to the
mass of people is there is an
establishment we have Tweedle Dum and
Tweedle D we oscillate between the
Republican and the Democrat nothing much
changes and if you do want to change the
only allowable place is to go to the
right because the left was anathema the
left was evil we had had we had a purge
of people on the left after World War II
very serious we didn't have a comparable
Purge of people on the right the
American people were taught there's
really two options this
consensus and the right you see that in
many European countries too you've
developed it they copied you know you
developed this core
middle but if people don't want to
Middle anymore and begin to ask
themselves what else is there what they
what they've had what has been available
is the rightwing alternative so they go
there if you develop a serious left-wing
alternative then you're going to see
which is going to shock people but it
shouldn't you're going to see that a
good percentage of those who went to the
right will go to the left because that
alternative is more attractive to them
and the best example we see right now is
France the people in France who are in
power the big block in the assembly
majority
Block No that's wrong plurality blocks
it's not a majority is the left it put
four parties together ran them as a
unified party and ends up the largest
Block in the assembly to the shock and
the end of Mr macron's career for sure
Etc and there's no reason to believe
that that's unique to France you see a
right-wing in France to show the point
but it's not big enough the left wing is
bigger over nobody should be surprised I
wouldn't be surprised if that happened
here but for that to happen there has to
be one of the things that was foreclosed
in this country which is a
leftwing because it was rendered the
evil communist other for so long that
nobody has the nobody has had yet the
key to bring the existing left into a
position where it could be an
alternative change from the consensus so
Mr Trump sits there all
alone another way to understand it which
is
consistent is to see
that in the second part of the undoing
of the New
Deal the Democratic party succeeded in
attracting
the support and the money of a large
number of American Mega
corporations they had always favored the
Republicans they still do if you look at
where the money goes it's very clear but
the Democrats were able to get Silicon
Valley portion of them and
others and that that was an existential
threat to the
Republicans because if the Democrats can
continue to get the unions
the women the
minorities disproportionate number of of
workingclass people and they get the
money the Republicans are done what they
can get given their history you know the
the Christian conservatives the white
supremacists and so on they're dead they
they lose and they did one election
after another so they made the decision
or rather Trump did on the people around
him okay if an end run of the Democrats
was to get some of our supporters the
money we've got to do a comparable end
run around them which we will we'll
start talking to the working class we'll
outdo the Democrats with the working
class the way they have outdone us with
the financial supports we used to count
on to be a viable political operation
and that's what happened Mr Trump
talks you know going to bring back jobs
here and he's going to get rid of those
awful immigrants that contest and
Destroy and eat pets yes that's that's
right I forgot it's already several
months old um but no look at the
symbolism he has an airplane in which he
has a helpless group of apparently
Colombian immigrants here puts them in
shackles their crime is their immigrants
which in most parts of the world is not
a crime it's not even clear it's the
crime here that would have to be
determined unless the old premise of
innocent until guilty has been absorbed
too and he dumps them on a
Runway at an airport in Colombia I mean
what you didn't sit down with the
Colombians to work you just dumped them
on and the answer is yes he didn't sit
down with the head of Panama to discuss
the canal or the head of Denmark to he
announced he announced this this is
Naughty Boy this is Naughty Boy and he's
made a career out of being the naughty
boy he's upset that he's treated like a
naughty boy and then acts like a naughty
boy which is not all that unusual among
naughty boys so that's what we had
symbolically
and the working class loves it because
they felt abandoned which they had been
the Democrats are as responsible for Mr
Trump as anybody else and it should be
understood for the historical moment
that it is and I think Mr Trump won
because he managed this symbolism very
well I am naughty I am not of that
establishment I hate them like you do
they have abused me personally just like
you
this and kamla Harris Can you know she
would have had to develop a different
Persona a different projection she
didn't do
that I'm not privy so I don't know what
her calculations were but I think they
were wrong I think she lost the election
not because Mr Trump became more popular
but because her side became less so and
so the the votes you know there were
fewer voters and blah blah blah and he
was able to make inroads among young
voters and black voters more than enough
to and he only won by one and a half% of
the vote you know he he has to create
the Mandate verbally because he doesn't
have it in
reality whe but you with him you never
quite know whether whether he grasps the
boundary between the fantasy and and the
B
and the reality or whether he really
thinks as other presidents have that he
can now create the reality it
conveniently conforms to how he would
like it to be this you know a lot of
people make that mistake before we
return to this Narrative of change which
I find very compelling and I guess it
might actually be involved in this
conversation in this this coming
question and also Victor Davis Hansen
who I just mentioned you referred to
Union and in our last conversation you
anticipated that the Unions would be in
support of Biden and I wanted to ask why
then for instance a union like the long
shoreman's Union ended up going for
Trump well the unions have been on
decline in this country if you look at
membership was not the only measure but
it's an important measure they've been
on decline for half a
century I mean that has put them in an
impossible situation they their
traditions in this country had to do
with servicing your
members you know filing grievances uh
representing your workers with the
employer getting better wages working
conditions and that takes time and
energy and
staff and the only way you pay for that
is if you have members who pay dues so
if you're losing membership for 50 years
and the line is literally I mean a
little blips but it's basically a line
of 50-year decline I believe their Peak
was in 1955 or around there and it's
been downhill ever since in the private
sector which is the major part of our
economy union membership is 7% or less
of the labor for that means 93% of
private employees are not represented by
a union well the unions are bankrupt
then they don't have them where are they
going to get the money to sustain the
staff which could provide the services
that could sustain the union when you
put that together with
the post depression roll back of the new
deal I mean remember 1947 is crucial
it's the passage of the Taft heartley
act whose whose Provisions most people
don't know but you really want to go
back if you're interested and look at
them there are things such as if you're
a communist you can't be a leader of a
union well hello friends Communists are
the people who usually lead unions and
do so in a militant way who else would
you expect I mean Communists with a
small C whether or not they're members
of a Communist party and even bigger
than the tartle ACT said
anything won by a union at a
workplace any wage increase any working
condition Improvement has to be given to
everybody working there whether they
join the union and pay dues or not I
mean what yeah and by the way not just
shame on the on on on the employer class
for having come together to support
these bills which why they pass but also
the unions themselves
did they not understand what this would
do to them did it take 50 years of
observing the
results the answer is they accommodated
to the conditions they
faced and those conditions were a
society that had gone through a trauma
the collapse of its own capitalist
system in the Great
Depression and the decision of the
employer class that what had happened
there must never be allowed to happen
again what happened there was the mass
of people cut an alliance with Mr
Roosevelt and got their social security
we talked about this last time and and
all of that Social Security unemployment
compensation the 10 million or 12
million workers hired by the government
all of the money for that was taken from
the rich the corporations and the rich
whose taxes were raised and who were
required to loan what they didn't pay in
taxes okay they don't want that ever
happen again and they went to work with
a kind of unanimity and a kind of
commitment that comes out of being
frightened badly frightened by what they
observed yeah this is hard to get across
to Americans but
what what for those people they observed
was the equivalent of what Europeans
observe oberved with Nazis marching
through their streets a a shock a shock
a horror for many
um a re shifting of the way you think
about the world and yourself in it and
they made a decision very impressive
to and They carried it through they
demonized the
left look many of the people hauled
before the house on American Activities
Committee believe it or not that's what
it was called not my language they chose
an unamerican Activities Committee you
they were going to decide what's
American and what isn't and they were
going to punish imprison Deport all
kinds of things they did with those who
were deemed
unamerican uh they went after the the
Coalition that produced a new deal it
was a coalition of the democratic party
Mr President
Roosevelt the union movement which he
encouraged led by the CIO which was then
the dominant union experience and there
two socialists and one Communist party
that was the New Deal
coalition people interested in civil
rights or women wanting the end of
sexism found their places within those
institutions Socialist Party communist
part labor movement and that had to be
smashed to bits and they went
systematically what was the weakest link
of that Coalition the Communist party
because that could be linked to the
great new enemy our former Ally right
you had to develop a theater and that
theater shaped the American political
Consciousness I remember when my son was
um of an age to go to college one of the
places he wanted to look at was the
University of
Chicago so my back them up and we went
to Chicago so that my son could you know
go around and they had a little program
like they usually do for for prospective
students and there was an existing
student who took us around showed us the
campus and at one point my son cuz it's
my son said well are there political
groups asking with all
the all the open honesty and N that a
17-year-old would have and the Young man
who was taking us around it was very
nice and very helpful said yes we have
everything from the then he me mentioned
a right-wing Young Americans for Freedom
a right-wing group all the way over to
the Democratic
party and for him and for everybody else
that was it that was
politics there was nothing further left
or same way of saying it further left to
takes you out of the conversation into
the area of scary dangerous
evil for that and the young man in the
University of Chicago very American had
absorbed that without understanding what
he was doing he absorbed the whole
country is that and that's why when this
era of
capitalism is over as I believe it to be
um and the dominant position in the
United States is over as I believe it to
be
and you turn in with the horror of that
the fear of what that means well then
you go to the right because that's the
alternative to what you have had all
along and you feel the need for a break
Mr Trump plays that theme endlessly I'm
new I'm different I'm going to I'm going
to I'm with the verbiage and the the the
hyper you know 400 president itial
orders each having to reverse them the
next morning could didn't think it
through look at this you it's a
spectacle but it's a spectacle that has
its real
Roots again I'm just keeping track of
all the things we're going to be coming
back to I I assume that a big portion of
our conversation will be about the end
of the American Empire and where we are
with Trump right now but now I I would
like to take this narrative you've given
about the election being explained by a
desire for Change and the inability of
Harris and the Democratic party to
provide that I'd like to connect that to
what Victor Davis Hansen said and see if
you see any resonance between the two
ideas the way that Victor accounted for
the election is he sees it I think as
part of a larger culture war between on
the one hand what he referred to as the
B Coastal left-wing intellectual Elite
and then on the other
side a more common folk that is simply
competent minded and down to earth and
cares about skills and and success and
doesn't care about ivy league degrees
and has spokes people like Mr Hanson and
has spokes people like Mr he is a farmer
has well he is he is uh so on the one
hand too I have four tomato plants yeah
go ahead on the on the one hand
I I see this as connecting to your idea
of change as well because presumably the
right wants change from this
obsolete uh left ruling class but I
wonder how if you see a similar culture
war of foot at all no I I I see people
like him really trying and stretching to
construct such an idea but in my view
that's because it doesn't work and
they're worried about where all this
might go and this is a much for them a
much happier story than the one I tell
they they don't want to deal with a
declining Empire they don't want to deal
with a capitalism that doesn't work they
want this to be all in the realm of the
bad people on the coasts
with their Evil elitism versus the men
and women of the soil this game has been
played by left wiers too this is a very
old way of thinking he may not know it
but I could give him references if he
wants about you know where this game has
been played before I don't think the
elites whatever that quite means on the
coast have the power or the
understanding to play the nice role of
bad guy that his his construct assigns
to them and you know I understand what
he's doing it's all over the place he
I'm sure he didn't claim he was the
origin of this Insight he repeats it and
for me it's it's empty it even if you
believed it you'd have to then explain
why do we have people on the coast who
do what they do say what they say
Advocate what you've have to explain it
what is there something in the air in
California and New York make them
attract I mean stop what is
this and it it becomes dangerous because
if it in the in the in the hands of
people less scrupulous than I hope Mr
Hansen is this can become you know a
rural against Urban an educated against
uneducated that that's where this goes
in the hands of many and and he will
bear responsibility because giving a
veneer of respectability to this way of
thinking is cheap in the end no I like
to ground what I'm saying in what's
actually happening in the economic
realities of the United States that you
know there are certain for example there
are certain
industries that are still viable in the
United States many Industries aren't why
not because
capitalists who make these decisions
made the decision to
relocate their P their businesses
overseas or those same capitalists made
the decision to
automate okay so a whole lot of
Industries
left and much of the unhappiness of the
people in The Middle on the country is
because that's what they left
from where whereas the industries that
still can function for all kinds of
reasons because there're service
Industries you can't have a service
industry in China serving people in
America because this industry has to be
where the people are otherwise it
doesn't work so we didn't we exported
manufacturing we didn't export services
with some exceptions the industries that
are still viable here high-tech they
went to California for all kinds of
reasons long ago so they can expand they
can hire more everybody can go live you
know in San Jose or in the environment
but that's not because the however
lovely California's climate it's because
these are industries that are
still viable as leadership Industries in
World capitalism located here that
leadership by the way is leeching
away last week we all got a lesson when
deep seek showed us what can be done by
those nasty Chinese folks in the way of
the high-tech AI Revolution it's not
going to be dominated by the United
States that's what that's what the
lesson is but that's we're going to
watch what what is the story The Hansen
of this world are going to tell us about
China's
arrival they're going to tell us
sadly that the Chinese copied a lot of
the United States
which is true but
irrelevant the newcomer always copies
the old one when the United States broke
from Britain you know what the Britain
charged the United States with for the
whole 19th century stealing our
technology which had its grain of Truth
it always does but this sudden there
still you know this is oh how awful what
you're really revealing is you you don't
know anything about your own history or
what are you doing it's and becomes
cheap and it slides
into well I'll leave that to the
audience to figure out where that stuff
slides to so I
understand the effort to make this a
culture
war is in my
judgment an attempt to distract
attention from other dimensions which
not only explain the story better but
help us understand why that culture War
even
exists what is its origin its cause
otherwise you start with a culture War
what is that how are you going to ground
that and and by the way I don't know Mr
hon but that kind of argument then
becomes grounded in stories of of
Education the the political complexity
of the United States that I've been
talking about was not significantly
different
from the political orientation of my
classmates at Harvard Stanford and
Yale so that's supposedly the
elite but they were as
cruess about the leftwing as most
Americans were because they were
affected by the same culture war against
the left that came out of World War
II you know
the most famous economics professor at
Harvard at my time was a man who with a
big reputation named Joseph Schumer you
may have heard his
name Joseph Schumer had a prize student
at Harvard named Paul Sweezy I was
hoping you'd say Rick Wolff no no Paul
Sweezy the the they're older than me I
was young just arriving there Paul
Sweezy was
who himself was a graduate of Harvard
who was a member of the Rockefeller
family the right
one and so he perfect he's mat Harvard
getting his degree comes from the
wealthy and he's the air apparent to
Joseph
shumer at the end of the
1940s Harvard fires
him he's teaching already they fire him
they're not going to let him replace
shum Peter as sh Peter wanted no why
because he had become a Marxist in the
1930s as so many had and Harvard under
the gun and the pressure had no more
backbone then than it has had recently
with its other leaders that had dumped
when the when the wind politically
changed and where did Sweezy
go he left
Harvard and went to New York City
and founded a magazine called the
monthly review which still
exists using money given to him by
Albert Einstein who wrote the editorial
in the first issue of monthly review
which was entitled why I am a
socialist right all of that all of that
that's the culture War but for people to
think that culture War didn't come out
of the history of this very bizarre
so for I I don't as a proposition I
don't take it serious as an interesting
phenomena of how you
avoid this is the continuation of the
the taboo on the Marxist or the leftist
way of opening up a question it's it's
an approach that that will not debate in
Europe is quite different then the right
has to debate the left it's too hard
they can't just dismiss it they try
in good American copying try to do
because they Envy what the United States
can do to its working class because you
can't do it there right Europeans have a
National Health Service Europe doesn't
allow the death penalty European
universities are mostly free yeah you
can't do to the working class there and
their capitalists are envious but other
than that the culture War stuff cannot
be pursued there the way it is here
because it doesn't have this history you
mentioned I mean as as an economist you
tend to support a lot of your arguments
with reference to economics absolutely
right and Victor's background at least
in part is farming so it was natural for
us to talk about the California wildfire
disaster because he could at at length
explain exactly what's going on with
California's water but the way that he
accounted for this situation and I bring
it up just because it's still quite
topical is that you have a situation
where the government is at the hands of
this by Coastal in this case West
Coastal Elite and they're ideologically
captured and incompetent and their
mismanagement is what led to this
tremendous disaster or at least
seriously contributed to it whereas if
you had had people closer to the soil or
closer to the water in charge this This
Disaster would not
have expanded to the proportions it has
um taken out but this is simple minded
in this what is this as an analysis bad
people made bad
decisions okay but why are those bad
people in a position to do that and why
did they make the bad what what where's
it what kind of an analysis this not
analysis
this is saying there something really
bad happened and I'm going to tell you
who's
responsible okay
uh can we get beyond that could you okay
you pointed at Jack or at what is it the
elite well how did they get to be the
elite who didn't get there why did that
happen come on this is not an analysis
this is substitute you don't need an
analysis you got the bad guy I don't
have to understand why any of this
happened I got the by the way you know
that's our Criminal Justice
System well we get the bad guy we put
him in jail
see yeah Jack you know what the
recidivism right in the country is that
guy in jail going to come out and you
know what jail is going to do and make
him worse you're not solving any problem
has jail solved our crime problem we're
a Crim ridden soci
everybody has a gun that was supposed to
solve the problem didn't you what are
you
doing that Mr Hansen can sit and again I
don't know him and I bear him no ill
will but to sit and talk like
this don't doesn't he feel the need if
he's going to make the bad guy be people
in California who have been incompetent
really you think incompetence is all on
one side of the legend
here and if they are incompetent how
come they're in this position to do
these things as such big incompetence I
mean the the questions that this kind of
line of thinking opens up that are not
admitted or addressed or to make you
wonder wow
wow and again I'm I'm getting closer to
taking
offense because there are ugly versions
of this
which are
racism you know that also pins a whole
lot of associations on some group well
what I noticed Mr Trump said that the
problem with immigrants is they do crime
and then his own FBI had to release the
statistics that the crime rate among
undocumented immigrants is lower than
the crime rate among natives which would
have been the reasonable presumption any
anyway why because if you're an
undocumented immigrant you want to keep
as far away from the police as I mean
come
on my parents were immigrants I'm also
personally affected by this and this by
the way Mr Hansen knows that this
country has a history serious history of
racism of blaming people for all of of
badmouthing every immigrant wave that
came here
the English did it to the Irish the
Irish did it to the Italian I could go
on and we all know that we really
do we invented the melting pot because
we were so upset by what the reality was
okay and still is in large parts of the
country
so what are you doing the culture War
means you're inventing yet another what
there's something you know these people
who live in California
have their incompetent oh what what is
racism those dark skinned people they're
not they're like children should I
rehash our American South this is a
dangerous way of thinking I don't think
he means it my suspicion is like most of
people like that he's ignorant of of
this country's history because if he
weren't he'd be much more hesitant about
talking like this knowing
where it comes from and where it might
go it doesn't
need some nice close to the soral farm
or to give it valid validity it's very
dangerous I do think that Victor is a
very careful thinker and he's not here
so yes for sure I can't speak for him
but when I next speak with him I will
certainly raise some of these points to
to it to get his opinions that's what I
if I were in a room with him right right
right right of course and but before we
move on I am curious to hear I mean I
take it I assume I I know that you're
somebody who likes to hear both sides of
an issue who likes to think about things
care I want to learn are there any
right-wing thinkers out there today or
political pundits or commentators who
you do find to be genuinely insightful
and
interesting I don't know what generally
quite means uh genuinely I yeah no I I I
don't know what it means and I'm no Jud
of how genuine they are but
um the the guy who used to be on Fox
News and then was kicked off and then
now Tucker Carlson yeah for example I
think sometimes he's very good really
yeah you like Tucker well like might be
a strong word no that's why I said
genuine how genuine I don't know but I
find it
interesting that he sometimes is able to
say do a piece of analysis very close to
my
own um from which I have learned and so
you know he does it in his way it's not
quite the way I do it but he alerts me
to a relationship that I didn't give
that much weight to so I'm grateful I'm
grateful to anybody who teaches me so he
has on occasion taught me I mean other
times he says things that I find
laughable and no interest you know other
than the pathology of this kind of
thinking that's why I don't know about
genuine or general but he he's one from
whom I have learned and when I when I
play with the internet and I come across
right I usually stop and listen and try
to see how they
construct for for example these days I'm
very interested in people whose
work uh I have a occasionally learned
from as they in my judgment slavishly
admire Trump in a kind of lopsided
enthusiasm that they don't normally show
to anything including ideas and
personalities on the right but for Mr
Trump they have really a almost an
adoration that makes them stop being as
critical as I know they have been in
other circumstances
I assume that will fade it after a walk
maybe
not but I have always made sure to look
at that point of view to listen to
it I do that in you know I'm interested
in Europe particularly so I've paid
attention to the right-wing Marina Leen
I read her work sometimes her statements
the uh in Germany your deuts I you may
remember I read French and German so
those things are accessible uh to me and
I make sure to when there's a character
who comes to my attention Victor Orban
in in Hungary
um mostly though the leaders of these
countries
are they're not very it's not an
impressive group put it that way uh
there are some exceptions but not many
and among the contending
politicals
um the most sophisticated discussion of
the French and German as far as I can
tell I mean to take
seriously uh Mr Storer in England is is
an effort there's nothing there just
there's nothing there I it
just but it I don't want to be unfair I
mean it's no more or less and Mr Biden
so something I find funny is that the
one reason I asked you about right-wing
thinkers is I'm always looking to I'm
looking for for new and and interesting
guests and I thought you might mention
somebody I hadn't heard of but you
mentioned Tucker Carlson which is uh
funny to interpret that obviously this
wasn't your intention as an invitation
to have Tucker Carlson on the show no
but but he do you know he doesn't need
exposure he doesn't need opportunity
because he writes his own and he
right now I'd like to ask just two more
questions about the election before we
move on from the election and these are
things that have come to mind as you've
been speaking I remember that your wife
is a therapist yes and I also know that
you have some interest in psychoanalysis
yes and you have mentioned a couple of
times in this conversation that involved
in Trump and his policies is this hodg
podge of
contradictions and what this makes me
wonder is whether you think that there's
something that
psychoanalysis as a form of cultural
analysis might tell us about the
election is there something going on in
America's
subconscious that led them to that led
people to vote for Trump some sort of
contradictory
sure I the reason I focus on
economics is not that I'm an
economist it's I'm an economist
because I became fascinated by the
economic dimension of things
so I would like to say that it's not you
know the old joke if you're a carpenter
then everything looks like a nail it's
not that it's that the economics and I
can tell you just for myself as I as I
went through when I arrived as a
freshman in college I wanted to be a
biochemist that was my intention I had
been a science kind of person in high
school and I wanted to be and my first
semester was all math physics
chemistry second semester biology
um so here I am an economist I obviously
didn't do that didn't make that my
career and that's
because I
discovered that the questions I
had about the economic
system which came out of my
life my family my conversation
particularly with my father and so on
and that those most
questions were never answered by the
teachers that I would say and I think I
mentioned this to you before that those
teachers either didn't know the answer
which was often the
case or they did and either told me
rarely or showed me more
often that they really didn't want me to
pursue this in the class with my hand up
I was a good student I got all a and
blah blah my parents made sure of that
uh so I had the teachers were friendly
to me they weren't wasn't
oppositional um a couple of exceptions
but not many they were
afraid and I think the fear in their
eyes which I pursued by going to their
offices and just sitting one on-one with
them where they told me what they were a
I realized that was right I saw fear and
they told me well that they were afraid
they didn't want this they wouldn't mind
talking with me in their office but and
then they basically explained to me what
I verified later anyway that and this is
Harvard so you might think it wasn't
you'd be wrong it was not good for your
career this you they were concerned they
don't know how a conversation in which I
ask questions dealing with Marxism and
they answered them would lead students
to begin to say oh not teacher without
meaning the teacher any harm but the
students would chitchat and and all that
they were afraid and I
think my interest
combined with their unwillingness or
incapacity to answer
them drew me into the F so if you ask me
why do I focus on economics because the
environment in which I was educated
couldn't handle it it was a taboo you
know it's like saying to someone why are
you interested in sex if they're honest
they'll tell you whatever the manifold
reasons might be one of the reasons is
is a big taboo and when they ask
questions Aunt Louise freaked out or
their father told them to go talk to the
mother and vice ver all the we all know
this
and that's that's part of why we're
interested in Saints because it has been
handled in the bizarre ways that our
culture does that I'm I'm interested in
economics because I think it helps
explain things but much more important
it's the missing thing in the
explanations otherwise we're stuck with
work at the level of your representation
I want to hold Mr Hanson but the way you
representative which I assume is the
perfectly reasonable way of doing it
that I don't want to work at that level
that that that's for me that's not
serious
stuff and by the way Tucker cson
sometimes really goes after the
economics you and you can see that even
even today what did I see today oh yeah
coming here in the taxi there was a
little ad a poit iCal
ad bust the slogan was bust big
Pharma
okay I found that
interesting I am agreeing with I would I
would like to bust big farmer too but
I'm surprised that somebody raised the
money to do this sort of thing okay
that's sort of interesting and I I have
noticed in some right-wing pieces I've
read a immense hostility to Big
farmer a hostility which the rightwing
didn't use to do but it's doing it now
yeah what's what's that they've just
that's an allowable
area yet to watch the inauguration of Mr
Trump and to see immediately in the
front row of the people sitting behind
him the billionaires of our time not the
governors not the Supreme Court Justice
who who's who is the celebrate and their
achievement is they have a lot of money
and they're going to be with this
President he wants them there that's why
they're there they want to be there and
he wants them there this is very
interesting and so he can go after big
Farmer they don't stop him they
don't they carefully avoid going there
but big farmer is not that far from big
high tech which is what coming next
anyway and we'll see how Mr Trump deals
with it since economics is I mean
naturally it keeps coming up I the the
last thing I wanted to ask about this
election specifically is whether you
also account Beyond this large scale
change narrative for the outcome of the
election with an appeal to economic
factors like I know inflation for
instance plagued Biden for very long
time but are there other economic
factors that you think really
contributed to Trump's Victory oh sure
my goodness yeah I don't think inflation
I mean inflation played a role
but it shouldn't be yanked out of the
context of everything
else
um the job prospects for young for
millions of young people in this country
are
awful there aren't jobs I mean even in
my field my students people that I sit
on doctoral committees and I I have to
examine a student and I have to make a
decision whether he or she gets their
PHD or not for whether this dissertation
is acceptable the students that I it's
harder and harder for them to get decent
jobs I if I had time I know give you a
lecture but the cast rophy of higher
education in this country when I went to
graduate
school I I never questioned of course
I'd get a job being a professor that's
what people with phds from fancy
universities could that if they wanted
it I might not get the job of my dreams
be professor at this school or sure but
that I would have a problem having an
income and it never it never dawned on
me and that's not because of me it
didn't dawn on my fellow students either
we never talked about it we never
worried about no not at all zero my
students obsess about it that's a
radical difference and most of my
students cannot get the kind of job I
had all of my adult life I taught two
courses a semester two semesters a year
and got paid a
salary that I could have a wife which I
had and two children which I had still
have and you know and I never thought
about
it and I I enjoy good food and wine I
like to travel I I have tastes that cost
money and I always had enough you know
I'm not super rich but that's all gone
my students worry
how they'll live in terms of income what
kind of work they will be able to get
many of them are adjunct professors who
teach a course over here then they run
across town teach another there's no
time to write there's no time to do
research there's barely enough time to
kind of keep up with yeah which by the
way is a
diminution of our education system
serious it means large numbers of young
people are being being educated by folks
that are exhausted I wasn't exhausted I
had time to read and prepare my lectures
very precious to me I learned as any
teacher who's honest will tell you you
learn much more when you're a teacher
than you ever did when you were a
student I had that opportunity most of
people like me don't have that
opportunity anymore
so that's a very serious problem problem
it's only for two or three million
people that are the folks who teach in
colleges and
universities but that's not an
unimportant part of an economy I would
argue it's spectacularly important I
don't know if you're aware or if your
audiences but we have more and more
colleges and universities that are
closing every month why because their
economics is
impossible right they they can't get the
students because the students are
increasingly unwilling to load up with
the debt without which you can't go to
college anymore wasn't my case most of
my fellow students didn't I did I had to
borrow my family had no money but most
of the students around me didn't their
families had enough money to
pay mine didn't but I never worried I
didn't have to borrow that much and I
never I knew I would have a job which
would all allow me to pay off my debt
which is exactly what happened to me I
expected it I got it that's all gone now
that's all
gone China is opening a new University
once a
month wow that's a big Stark difference
yeah a very Stark difference and you
want to know I don't know if you know
the Deep seek story that's a little
entrepreneur could you tell it yeah for
sure deep seek has come up with a better
way of moving the artificial
intelligence Revolution forward and it
exploded into the public awareness in
the middle of January or the second half
of January of this year
2025
and the Breakthrough came in in a small
company owned and started by an
entrepreneur who's the CEO of the little
company called deep seek with the S
capitalized so it's the word deep and
then Capital
seek
um and he explains that he
hired new graduates of some of the new
technical universities in
China he doesn't say but clearly the
message is they're fresh they're new and
they're
cheap because one of the things that he
came up with was a compe
product basically think of it as a
search engine for how
to go through vast amounts of data super
quick to come up with what AI can do
which
is a paragraph or a paper or an analysis
it's crude but it it does a lot of the
preliminary research that anybody has to
do in any field it's being used now for
example to do diagnosis you feed into
this machine the 27 characteristics of a
patient who comes with a pain or
something and you get better diagnosis
because basically you can mine the
history of that of those symptoms and
see when they all occur together what
the three most likely diseases and that
just saves an enormous is very helpful
and they have comparable applications in
many other fields are use it myself I've
begun to use it recently oh W yeah you
can you can have an idea of a
relationship in economics between I know
an interest rate and exports and you say
what is the relationship between and the
Machine gives you an answer now there
are holes in it there are mistakes in it
but it gives you a very nice place to
start then you fix the holes and you
correct the
errors it's as if you had a gra a very
good graduate student and said go get me
everything on this which is what I mean
I've been in that position I told the
grad go get me this right and you very
quickly discover who's the better
graduate student who isn't because one
of them comes back in two days with a
wonderful and the other one comes back
in two days and says how do I do this
anyway
um so it's a small
company and for a tiny fraction I
believe five or six million dollars they
have done something that is the
equivalent of what costs billions in
Silicon
Valley and you know it the stock market
the biggest company in the United States
and the stock market recently was a
company called Nvidia you may have heard
of it it lost 600 billion let me do it
again $600 billion dollar of value oh
gosh in one day wow when this was
publicized it turned out the public the
publicity was that over the last weekend
it really was this last
weekend more people downloaded that
program which by the way is available
for free from this little
company than anything else on the whole
Apple system Apple app they bought it
from the App Store you know so everyone
in America I now know 20 people that are
using that's fast all these things go
they're not using the ones from
California they're using that one cuz
for them I mean California is still
producing these things and there will be
comp it's not over there the one in
China has flaws also it's not that it's
just another sign if you needed it where
the competition is coming and since
that's the remaining Dynamic industry of
the United States to see it there wow
now you know before and I will be using
that example now to make my arguments
before and I believe the last time you
and I spoke the example was electric
vehicles you know that was where the
Chinese but that's an old industry the
automobile industry AI is the newest of
the new explosive Industries and the
Chinese are right there neck and neck
doing it I mean it's just and then when
you hear he's taking advantage of all
the universities opening up I think the
American economy is in terrible
difficulty and that the and that the
crisis of our time which includes Mr
Trump is that the response is
denial self delusional denial which is
not surprising I I have a certain
compassion for it it's
hard to be alive at a time when your
Empire is dying
is hard if your economic system is full
of problems really is that conversation
we had about the electric vehicles was a
couple of episodes ago and we're we're
reaching a lot of new listeners now and
on top of that I found that whole story
incredibly fascinating because we think
of the automobile as an American
invention if there ever was one and we
think of ourselves as being on The
Cutting Edge of their development even
now with electric vehicles in Tesla so
for those of our listeners who aren't
familiar with this story just are we not
dominating electric vehicles anymore
what's going
on you know the most I will I'll be
happy to do it but the most important
thing about
it is that
interested
intelligent thoughtful people like your
audience and like you don't know it that
order to worry you
okay here it
is 15 years ago the automobile
industry began a competition who could
come up with the best electric vehicle
because it was understood and generally
viewed that's the future of the
automobile industry we are in a
transition for ecological reasons and
cost reason blah blah blah we're moving
away from fossil fuels that make our car
is run gasoline and we're going to go to
Electric
okay that was a
consensus why because there were very
few voices there were but very few
voices which were drowned out in the
United States pushed aside the way these
folks usually are which said that this
was fundamentally
irrational that what the country needs
is mass
transit why because the indiv idual
vehicle is a
ridiculous way of organizing
Transportation most cars spend most of
every day sitting somewhere this is nuts
what are you doing yeah it's in your
garage it's in the street it's in the
parking facility what are you doing so
that for 20 minutes a day or maybe even
an hour a day you're actually in there
but the rest of the them sits there what
you can even see that the understanding
carefully that we now have bicycles here
in New York City loads of them all over
every few blocks there's a bunch of and
when you need a bicycle you get a
bicycle you pull it out it's automated
you drive around and you stick it back
in one of the holders and that way a
terribly amount of waste is avoided
we're not building millions of bicycles
cuz we don't need millions millions of
people want to bicycle will provide it
20,000 will do it very nicely because
I'll take it for the hour I need it and
put it back in and John will come and
then Mary will come and we'll share we
have a mass transit system for bicycles
just like we have here in New York City
a Subway with a fantastic invention it
takes many more people at infinitely
lower cost nobody gets injured or once
in a blue moon by a Subway no you
it's just it doesn't pollute it it's
infinitely better to do mass transit do
it beautifully do it elegantly people
say to me what would that mean I say go
to Europe to get on train Tokyo go to
toy go to Tokyo I'm familiar with Europe
you go the trains are magnificent you
have even the the super fast ones you
know why the United States is so far
behind will leave aside although
fascinating anyway 15 years ago let
we're gonna do the electric car stupid
because you're replacing the private car
with another private car but at least
better than fossil fuel it'll be
electricity
run okay Tesla is one of the early
pioneers and makes Mr Elon Musk a
household name and and Rich very
rich but uh General Motors works on it
Ford works on it Toyota works on
everybody works on But Here we are now
15 years later the Chinese have
automobile company they work on it too
but they win they win the competition
the best car best electric car and truck
at the lowest price is made by the byd
corporation precisely unknown in the
United States for a simple reason
they're not permitted to come here if
you go to Europe today and you go on the
highways you'll see byd vehicles all
over the place why Mr Biden first Mr
Trump put a
27% tariff on electric vehicles from
China and then Mr Biden while he was
still president raised it to
100% so if you want to get a byd
electric car say it cost
$30,000 if you're an American company or
an American individual you would have to
come up with 30 grand that goes to China
to buy the car and 100% another 30 grand
that goes to Uncle Sam as a tariff
costing you
60,000 what does this mean it means that
Americans won't buy the Chinese car cuz
it's 60 Grand and they can get for 45 or
50,000 a Tesla or a GM this is a a
tariff that protects
Tesla and GM what that's why it's there
but it denies to the American
people access to the best electric
vehicle at the lowest price and now let
me explain very briefly why that is
stupid okay American companies compete
with companies in the rest of the world
American companies that make shoes if
there are any left American companies
that make anything they need trucks for
example they need a truck to bring the
inputs to wherever they carry out
production and they need trucks to take
the output to wherever it's sold right
so trucks are wide widely used input
here in America by American companies
and everywhere else in the world but
everywhere else in the world is now
going to be able to get the best quality
electric truck for3 ,000 whereas their
American competitor could only get the
best electric truck if they paid 60
which they won't they'll buy an inferior
truck and still pay more than their
competitor pays for the superior truck
and you know what that means American
companies are going to lose the
competition and eventually lay off the
workers since they can't sell their
products that have been too EXP
expensively
produced so you're protecting the
workers at GM and
Ford but at the expense of not only many
other American workers but I can tell
you as a mathematical Economist we
cannot know whether the jobs we protect
in the automobile industry won't be
overwhelmed by the jobs we lose as a
result of this tariff
okay we live in a society which I may
Jump Ahead in the in our
conversation in which we allow a
president to do two remarkable Mr Trump
two remarkable thing one to constantly
Miss speak about
tffs by now it's intentional because I'm
going to hit the Chinese Chinese people
don't pay our tariffs we do the Tariff
is a tax on
Imports all right that means the
Republican party for a hundred years the
party advocating tax cuts has become
overnight a party championing taxes
namely tariffs that really ought to make
people what's going on
here but he slides out from that by
having large numbers of Americans all
the polls show it think that the Tariff
is paid by the people over there
non-american it isn't no is real simple
it
isn't but number two he never tells you
what are
the you know how do I put this what are
the negatives what are the side effects
of a tariff now tariffs have been around
for centuries there is an immense
literature in economics about tariffs
there's nothing new about it there's is
nothing unheard of if you spend if you
take a course in in international trade
in any economics program that I'm
familiar with and I'm familiar with a
lot of them I've taught this materal you
teach it there's an segment of the
course about tariffs and what you do is
you teach when are tariffs used what do
they achieve what are the problems what
are the negative and positive and
they're both side effects but we have
have a president who talks about this is
a winwin winwin
situation this is
moronic it doesn't understand the
literature which never says that it
doesn't understand even what it is doing
and it's a continual fooling of the
people into thinking that you know we're
going to resore you know bring industry
back because when they make it too
expensive for them to yes there'll be
some of that but there'll be all these
other things which the literature is
full of because it's these are lessons
that have been learned by people who did
this all of this is magied away it's
it's a stunning and you know that Mr
Trump he doesn't understand it it's
clear to me because if he did the level
of lying I maybe he's capable of it but
I'll give him the benefit that I find
that hard to understand but that the me
New York Times and the
others you know Paul Krugman writes for
the New York Times he's a Nobel PR and
his specialty is international he
knows come on and many many like him
know what but there's this America and
that's the again the legacy of the Cold
War you don't get even this weird Trump
character because these are often
liberals that I'm like
they they can't bring
themselves to be reasonably critical
that may change but for the moment I'm
I'm here
explaining the economics of tariffs to
people I do it all the time because they
ask all the time and they're all you
should see them in the audiences you
know they're all that that's because I'm
telling them something that they don't
know and that's not their fault that
should be what what are you doing is why
are you doing a tariff when you know
that yes you will protect the jobs of
the immediately affected but there are
all these other con
what it's like announcing I'm taking
over the Panama Canal you can't do that
because of the ramifications what do
what are you you been denouncing Mr
Putin for 3 years that he invaded
another country and took something that
isn't his you just announced you're
going to do that what what do you think
that do has you don't have to worry you
just m the tough gu stop this isn't
serious but with him
this
exaggerated Bluster got in the election
because it's a naughty boy and he's
being a naughty again and the whole
world is more naughty and it
works but
man those negative side effects they
don't go away because you pretend
they're not there that's like the little
child and I did this with you I'm sure
the little three-year-old confronts the
scary doggy in the park and he or she
puts their little hands in front of
their eyes because they think if they
can't see the dog it won't be there
but by the time they're four or five
years old they have learned the lesson
you can do that the doggy is still there
Mr Trump and this country are engaged in
levels of denial that I look at and I go
wow what is going on in a society that
would do
this what why self-d delude what what
what
possible and if we as I believe or I
hope we do talk about the internal
contradictions of the economic program
of Mr Trump then you'll see that this
this is what I've just told you it's all
over the
place not just with tariffs but with
deporting immigrants in Sonia you know
the secondary consequences here ought to
make any rational
government
stop and the fact that this government
isn't stopping well draw the
conclusion let me try to illustrate the
the
contradictions
internal craziness of what is being
proposed and I'm going to do that in two
ways I'm going to use what we in
economics call supply and demand
analysis I'm very simple-minded
uh approach we teach students as a
beginning to understanding economics and
then I'm going to also
use the marxian economics idea of
surplus which gives you insights that
the supply and demand apparatus uh
doesn't
Okay the President
says and has already in the first weeks
of his administ
rtion Illustrated
dramatically that he is going to
deport
undocumented
immigrants of which the Homeland
Security Department of this country says
we have somewhere around 12 million 10
to 15 million somewhere in
there okay let's take a look at what
this might mean
mostly these are undocumented
immigrants are young people of working
age yes some of them bring children when
they come but most don't and some of
them bring their elderly but most
don't these are young men and women who
can travel through the desert and take
the hardships that are involved in
coming here for many
so they arrive
here and they take the worst
jobs and by worse jobs I don't just mean
those that are poorly paid although
that's the majority of
them I mean jobs that are
dangerous jobs that are
irregular jobs for
employers that are highly unscrupulous
much of the
time and the reason they have those jobs
is because unlike a native born worker
they will never go to the police to
complain if they're made to work without
protective gear or they're made to work
too many hours or they are made to work
without being given the pay that they
were promised or when they undertook the
job employers know that they can get
away with this cuz they've been doing
that forever for time in Memorial which
means that the The
Immigrant is particularly profitable as
an employee because you can rip them off
basically and that's one of the reasons
that the United States has always
welcomed employees because the employers
knew you could do things with them you
couldn't
otherwise I could go on you also cram
these people into the worst
neighborhoods with the lousiest
housing again because they cannot and
will not
complain they will not demand what is
legally available to them for fear that
it will blow their cover and they will
be hassled by the police the police
don't treat them very well again for the
same reasons and so
on
so I'm not going to mention what it
means to Target these
people many of whom have spent years at
the bottom of the jobs pyramid in the
United
States what it means exactly ethically
or
morally to pick them up
off the
street put them in shackles which is
being done now and dropping them in
Mexico or Colombia or wherever you you
can impose that there how this
squares with
Christian Jewish Muslim or any other
religious system I know of I leave to
the mysteries of our human beings are
are
religious uh extraordinary but I'm not
going to focus on that here's the supply
and demand you are reducing the supply
of
labor you're literally taking people who
had offered and delivered labor effort
brains and muscles eight hours a day or
more across the United States millions
of them are being withdrawn from the
labor market so the supply of workers is
being cut you know if you're G to get
rid of 10 million people it's going to
make an
impact on the other
hand you're going to impose
tariffs meaning
that Goods produced
abroad will no longer purchased by
Americans because they become more
expensive Mr Trump has said and by the
time this airs he may well have imposed
25% tariffs on both Canadian and Mexican
goods and again I'm not that's what he
said and and he had he had promised to
do that earlier so did it
consistent um that violates the
treaties that were initially signed by
Mr Clinton the
NAFTA and then Rewritten and resigned by
Trump himself in his first
presidency with a new name but it's
basically a common market between the
United States Canada of the north Mexico
to the South and it meant it meant that
Goods could move between them without
tax no tax being applied by any of the
three countries to any of the other he's
abrogating that he's not having a
conference to discuss it he's not having
meetings with the leadership to talk he
unilaterally abrogating which is the
politest way you can put this violating
would be another term this
treaty with our two
neighbors interesting move MH I'm not
going to talk about that I'm going to
assume it goes through in one form or
another the United States is the major
market for both of those
countries therefore this is a big blow
to them because they're going to see the
demand for their exports to the United
States drop because an American has to
pay his own government the American
government the Tariff the tax and that
makes it more expensive in the matter I
just went through with the electric car
from China so it's gonna hurt them and
and Mr Trump
never discusses the hurt done to
them deals with them as if they're bad
bad
people and says this is all done because
they allow fentel to come for through
their countries into the United States
notice the bad guy is the one who allows
the the
movement not the country to which the
movement is directed because Americans
buy and consume that stuff on a record
level nope none of
that
interesting no Mr Trump
says it's also he admits to resore
America right because if it's too
expensive to bring the OB object from
Canada in or from Mexico in the hope is
the Hope is that the
producer will come back to the United
States make it inside because then
there's no tariff it's
applicable all right I'm not going to
discuss the
obvious and I'm glad you're smiling
because it really is childishly obvious
that a a producer in Canada or Mexico
would be nuts to come here right away
because he doesn't know how long Mr
Trump will stay with this policy he
doesn't know whether it'll Disappear
With when Mr Trump disappear appears so
and it's very expensive
so we also don't know whether the
company affected like this will leave
Mexico and go across its Southern border
into Guatemala another place which
doesn't have a tariff but then it can't
risk doing that because Mr Trump will
put the Tariff on against Guatemalan
Goods so let's assume that
some some reassuring takes by some
companies at the margin will come in to
the United States and produce here at
home the ostensible goal and purpose of
all of
this that would mean an increase in the
demand for labor because those companies
instead of hiring Mexican and Canadian
workers by coming back would be hiring
American War which is the ostensible
purpose okay let supply of labor is
going down and the demand for labor is
going up what is that supposed to do
with demand and Supply analysis answer
it's going to raise
wages a lot why because you can't rip
off American Born workers the way you
rip the so you're going to have to pay
wages you never thought you'd have to so
wages will go up in the United
States whoa now let's take it two more
steps and we're
done why would capitalists Across
America who supported mys
Trump welcome that the cost of Labor is
going up and eating into their profits
see
contradiction but we're not done because
when Mr Trump imposes a tariff one of
the results the textbooks are full of
this is called
retaliation other countries can put
tariffs just like we can which means
American companies who export are going
to have the same problem they're not
going to have a market the way they used
to because the other the countries
retaliate they put a tariff on goods
from America and they and they've said
it if you take if you tariff us we will
retaliate so the companies will have
higher wages to pay and why they can't
sell the way they used to that's a onew
punch right in the nose of the employer
class they're the ones who gave him the
job that's not his job in their minds
how's he going to handle what I just
described what what not only that but if
you put a
tariff and the prices go
up what the literature teaches is that
the protected companies the ones who
like it that you put a tariffs so your
Canadian competitor can't compete with
you anymore and your Mexican competitor
can't what you induce the American say
great I ra my prices cuz even if I raise
them 10% they've stuck the Canadians
with 25% tariff everyone's going to have
to pay me my 10% more because still
better than the alternative they can get
you know what that means they're going
to get an
inflation is it possible that other
things which I don't have the time but I
if you want to we can go there that
other things will neutralize what I just
said that's possible that's what I meant
by a Hail Mary pass what he's doing is
ridiculous
economically and so maybe his rejoiner
or someone who's smarter than him might
be able to do is to say yes but if this
this and this and this happen well that
and that's possible it's always possible
it's not the logical thing to
expect and to expect it from someone who
never mentions any of these things even
though as I hope I've showed you they're
as simple as I apple pie there are no
mystery here there's nothing complicated
and the literature about these things is
full of all of this not a word of what I
just said with to you is original to me
not at
all so all I can tell you is with this
level of contradiction at the basis of
what is being proposed here you're
looking at a really strange phenomena
unfolding
now let me show you from another from a
marxian economics
perspective another remarkable thing
which also touches American history and
which I'm really interested in conveying
to your
audience a working AG
immigrant which is what most of the
undocumented immigrants in the United
States today
are is a gift to the United states it is
a subsidy to the United States it is
very weird to be ejecting this
gift it it really is like a neighbor
bringing you a lovely apple pie and and
while they're there you're saying oh
thank you and then you throw it in
garbage I mean
whoa that's bizarre what are you doing
right why do I say that well
take a 20-year-old
Guatemalan young woman comes across the
border an enormous amount of money has
been spent on that 20-year-old young
woman before she crosses the Border in
Texas and enters the United States as an
undocumented
immigrant she has had to be fed fed for
20 years that cost money money she's had
to be clothed for 20 years what cost
money she's had to be sheltered she had
to be educated to a certain amount
whatever they have where she comes from
those are enormous expenses every
society has such
expenses for the citizens before they
reach working age think of it this way
when they
work they they produce they create value
until they work they absorb it that's
what we do for our
children Guatemala picked up the
cost the United States had no cost we
didn't feed them we didn't raise them
nothing the Guatemalans did that for
free from the American point of view not
from them they had a real expenditure
they had to produce the food clothing
and shelter that they gave to their
children we didn't as a we get them only
when they're ready to
work now in it marks in theory when they
work let's assume they're paid $10 an
hour maybe I should assume
$725 because that's the minimum wage in
this country the federal minimum wage
they get paid
$725 per
hour it's clear and easy to show that
for most of them in an hour they produce
by their labor either a greater quantity
or a better quality of an output
whatever they're hired to do you know
fold laundry wash your car uh
whatever which means now I'm using the
marxian system they produce a surplus
mhm no one is going to hire them for
$725 unless doing so makes the employer
more than $7
that's the
rationale Marx worked this out so I have
to give him credit otherwise I would be
acting as though I had figured this out
which I didn't um so the
Immigrant brings to the United
States a Costless
worker who immediately goes to work how
else are they going to survive producing
a
surplus for the employer who hires
him a better Surplus proportionally than
he could get from a native born worker
which is why he hired
him
okay this is an
enormous gain to the United States
economy not a loss a gain dwarfs all the
rest of the
BS right does he does this work get
drunk sometime absolutely do they
occasionally commit a crime of course
FBI tells us they commit crimes less
than native born which I'm not surprised
because they're undocumented and they
can't risk it so this is a
subsidy the uni here comes the history
the United States's greatness as a
capitalist system over the last
century was dependent upon its ability
to absorb wave after wave of the subsidy
to this economy represented by
immigrants deporting them is a sign of
weakness deporting them means you can't
get the
subsidy it's the equivalent of having
high-tech get billions of subsidy from
Washington and saying oh no thanks don't
want it woo never going to happen no
company would be so stupid and we're not
stupid to what's going we can't we can't
do anymore what we once did what we once
did was to say to the Immigrant come
here yeah we'll give you the crappiest
jobs yeah we'll stick you in the ghetto
slum neighborhoods yeah yeah yeah yeah
but but
but within a reasonable amount of time 2
years 5 years 10 years we'll be bringing
in another wave and they will be slipped
in under you and you will be able to
rise the crappiest jobs will now be
given to them the new immigrants you
will be able to go to the next level a
nicer neighborhood a better school
better apartment and all and not only
that we'll make a mythology about it
it'll be called American
exceptionalism and it will focus on the
remarkable social Mobility that can be
achieved Horatio aler from poor
immigrants you will write all of that
theater we can't do it
anymore we can't we're going to have to
persuade
Americans native born to live in the
crappy housing to accept the crappy job
no more Horatio aler
mythology as so and you know what that's
about that's the weakness of American
capitalism that's the end of the Empire
and the profits it made it's the because
the dollar isn't the universal currency
anymore it has to share that role with
with the the Japanese Yen or the Chinese
Yuan or the European Euro it it's
over the Empire is
finished but we can't say it we can't
face it we can't talk about it as a
nation the president is acting like he's
going to tell on taking green Greenland
and I'm changing the name of the Gulf of
me what What Child is theater visit and
so go back to the beginning of our
conversation that's why all this is
irrelevant because it's so detached from
what is actually at stake here it is so
full of the blust I'm going to C this
we Europeans ask me why to focus on the
Tariff and I say to them you know I want
to do the whole analysis I don't usually
have the time you give me the time for
which I am grateful but
the short answer to the Europeans is
when he was the president the first time
everything he tried to do was blocked in
you know by the Democrats or by lawsuits
or by this or one of the few things he
could just do is a tarff because
Congress some years ago passed a law
giving the president this odd power to
use this
tool unilateral he doesn't have to get
anybody's permission he can just do it
right so he realized that so the answer
to why he's using tariffs is because he
can not because it's the right tool not
because it's the best tool it's because
he he can be Mr Trump throwing
Thunderbolts like Zeus you know in in
mythology so that's why we have we're
all talking about tffs we as a culture
we don't know anything about it the
thing people are saying if I were a
nastier person I would have a field day
just mocking the officials who keep
talking about ter starting with Mr Trump
because it's all the behavior of someone
the speech of someone who doesn't know
what they're talking it's not even I
don't blame him he he doesn't know
anything he shouldn't speak about what
you don't know because it's going to
it's going to come back and haunt you
and it will it will you know the
Canadians are now going to have to react
and the Mexicans react and I haven't
even gone into that with you Mexico
let's do that just one more Mexico we
are going to deport mostly the Mexico
Latino undocumented immigrants which is
the largest group and most of those will
go to Mexico
okay let's do the simple economics
those people had jobs here in the United
States and one of the things they did
with their wages low as they are was to
send the portion back to their families
in Mexico to help care for their
children they left behind to help care
for their elderly they left behind those
things are called remittances in
economics but when you have millions of
people then they become an important
part of your
economy many of the Villages of
Mexico will be seriously impacted by the
end of the remittances which will happen
when that immigrant who sent them is
deported he won't be working anymore or
she won't and won't be able to send home
that's going to hurt the Mexican economy
number one now number two a
tariff much of the industry in Mexico
sells to the United States they're going
to suffer
terribly by the closing of the American
Market because Americans are not going
to pay those tariffs to get those mixes
by this includes basic things like home
appliances automobiles large numbers of
automobiles in America for General M
come from Mexico where they are produced
or
assembled so Mexican industry is going
to be hurt in its exports to the United
States
and so they're going to have to lay off
Mexican
workers which will increase
unemployment and now the last part but
the returning deportees will make that
unemployment that much worse remittances
stop exports hurt and a flood of people
with no
jobs Mexico is a poor
country this is impossible you're going
to create you think you have a problem
with the drug gangs of Mexico
now you're going to produce I maybe Mr
Trump's hidden agenda is to Annex all of
Mexico and make it the 52nd state after
he takes Canada maybe look and maybe
he'll be forced into that by the very
consequences of what he's doing he is
savaging
Mexico and that's we have I don't know a
Thousand Mile border with Mexico ago is
that a very smart thing to
do most people wouldn't think
so where's the conversation there is
none there is none the closest you get
are the statements of Mrs Shin Bal the
new leader of
Mexico who's got some courage and is
pushing back the Canadians folded but
not the Mexicans so we'll see but talk
about
contradictions H I hope I've given you a
flavor of some of them a recurring idea
in the conversation at this point is
that Trump is the Naughty Boy and as I I
think I've brought this up in many of
our past conversations because it's
impossible to avoid that you
are probably the most gifted rhetorician
and natural natural thespian since you
mentioned leader that I've met in my
life and this is something a skill set
that both of you the two of you have in
common and maybe maybe that's why I see
it in them you know it's visible in
everyone but yourself yeah that's funny
and Victor Davis Hansen enter again as
long as we're using theater parlons and
we spoke about some of Trump's
rhetorical tactics and he I maybe would
use maybe he would be okay with the
phrase naughty boy but he thinks of
Trump's rhetoric as extremely skillful
and useful and he appealed to the art of
the deal and made cases for why some of
these moves you've discussed were
extremely useful and I think these are
still very topical uh talking points and
they're funny and interesting so i'
since you've mentioned them I'd like to
go through them them one by one first
what is the motivation behind or idea
behind suggesting that we should make
Canada the 51st state why would Trump
say that is it useful was it skillful
did it produce
anything
no I don't think so for
me I don't see any
again I I would be interested in someone
like Mr Hansen if he could show me why
that is a skillful strategic move I
don't see it I see this as Bluster that
Mr Trump has discovered that this
Bluster is effective and I think there's
a psychological reason I think he speaks
for an awful lot of people
who are frustrated in Americans I'm
talking about frustrated bitter
angry and yet don't
have the time the energy the interest
the
education to do very much with their
anger so they Bluster to you know over
one too many beers you know these
Canadians they are whatever you know it
it normally would it wouldn't be taken
as as much but when he
blusters it validates their
Bluster and that's his function I think
that's what he doing he may be aware of
I don't know if he's aware of it I might
guess this he is you remember early on
in his career he liked to
say I could go out on Fifth Avenue and
shoot
someone and people would still applaud
what I'm doing he he stumbled onto
a
connection his own
life and that of large numbers of people
they vibrated
together he was dismissed by the upper
echelons of American corporate Society
he was you know a gifted child that is
the father left a lot of money to the
kid his father who had real estate in
Brooklyn and left the chunk of money to
his son so the claim that he worked hard
to make his money is silly
and that was used against him a lot he
suffered from that he's none too bright
and so he didn't do very well in school
or he is bright and he you know spent
time grabbing parts of anatomy and
drinking too much uh and so there wasn't
much there he got out of the army by his
b own
Spurs doesn't look very good and the
ruling Elites didn't there were his
crudeness his he didn't learn at the
University what so many people do how to
act I had to learn that it was important
to get a tweed jacket when I went to
college it was important to get a tweed
jacket with a leather patch over here
whether I needed it or not I learn I
learned how to speak if you think I
speak well I did I learned how to my
parents are immigrants they were not
adepts at the English language I didn't
speak English until I was five you know
I spoke German and French um
but I did learn a certain way of acting
a certain way of presenting myself I
don't think he ever did he was naughty
in various ways as you grew up and was
therefore an outsider and and bitter
about it not able to break in you know
um an associate you know his daughter
marries the son of another real estate
dealer who's in
jail H this is
not what is this this is very
strange uh um so I I
think he's
belligerently
angry at an establishment that excluded
him and that gives him a solidarity with
masses of Americans who are also bellig
belligerently angry at another
establishment that they feel rejects him
and they get a lot of that and I don't
deny that for a minute there are an
awful lot of people
who like Mr Hansen live in the world of
the elites and and they feel one one
group is problematic because they think
they are the elites and the other group
is problematic because they think
they're oppressed by an elite I disagree
with the analysis out of which both
positions come I I have no idea what
Elite
means if if you're talking in the gener
realities it's usually presented I don't
know what what what it means people in
California and New
York work in different Industries have
different communities and see the world
somewhat differently than if you live in
Arkansas or Tennessee I I get that has
always been true in this country I don't
you know recasting it as it's a game I I
understand why you play it I understand
the purpose of it I I don't like it cuz
I know where it can go well may not go
there I hope not but I know where that
can go that's that's a little bit for me
like listening
to someone
explain Larry Summers remember him he's
been on the show okay he got himself
into a lot of trouble yeah when he was
the president of
Harvard gave a speech where he explained
why women can't do something science as
well as men now in my humble opinion
that's real
stupid uh since I don't admire him I
don't mind saying that's real
stupid but it it lost him that position
it hurt him
badly uh but the interesting question
for where would this come what are you
doing what are even if you believe that
what are you doing
talking like that don't you have a you
don't know enough about American culture
to know that this day and age in this
Society you can't do
that right I mean it says something
about you that you are way out of touch
with the invi you know what it it's
astounding that a that is the qualific
ation to be bounced out of harbard not
because you don't do economics not
because you can't run Harvard and of
course you can but this is a level of
some word insensitivity obtuseness out
of touch
inness that really disqualified me
Whoa by the way he said other things
that you could also maybe you know them
go after him about or it now it's
possible I don't know him personally so
but it's possible he's naughty too that
there's a part of him that wants to be
able to say such a thing and it leaked
out he maybe wasn't all that careful I
don't know I don't even know what he
thinks about it in retrospect but it's
another example of
Wow and his mistake unlike
Trump's Trump discovered the audience
that responded positively
poor Larry
didn't he delivered that dumbness to the
wrong audience in the wrong place at the
wrong time and he got punished for it Mr
Trump had he tried that Bluster up at
Harvard would have been shot down you
know or Yale or any of the other places
no no he
understood where he go look where he is
now his base is the South part parts of
the Midwest and those kinds of folks
around elsewhere but he learned who his
supporters were and he went there you
know earlier he didn't understand that
he earlier he was a Playboy in New York
you know his excitement was going to the
Playboy club his excitement was being a
junior member of the rich in New York
City he hated being Junior all the time
which I get and the naughtiness was inre
encouraged by
that so he was
angry about being
excluded and then was NY which assured
his exclusion and he was trapped in that
contradiction without the ability you
know I don't know if he can spell
contradiction let Al use it analytically
but as a as one of the Senators whose
name I forget once said there is no
intelligence requirement to be a senator
yeah it's a good one well the the the
second of these rhetorical topics that I
wanted to address you've already
mentioned but I think it might also be a
good opportunity as a throwback to some
of our earlier more pedagogically
focused episodes for a bit of a an
economics or a trade lesson but what is
the Strategic importance of the Panama
Canal for us and why would Trump make
the hint well they're not hint
the claims about taking it as he has
been
well I can I'll give you the
answer but I'm not at all sure that the
answer I'm giving you is why Mr Trump
did this and I'm genuinely concerned not
to be misunderstood on that point I can
make a better case for what he did than
he has so far made okay interesting that
so my here's my suspicion why he did it
because it
[Music]
is a way of being naughty and tough you
know Jimmy Carter I believe
1977 signed the documents that gave the
canal to The Sovereign independent
country of Panama okay so it violates so
he's naughty he's violating the rules
he's the the rule breaker the new rule
maker
he you most Americans had no idea that
there's an issue there right number one
what what is the big issue
there the only issue that I can
see is part of an
anti-china
agenda the number one country that uses
the Panama Canal is the United States
the number two country is
China because they're number one and two
in a whole lot of areas there's one
too China has built not
surprisingly a bunch of Port facilities
on either end of the canal you know
buildings and bought land and have
establishments there Chinese companies
and who may or may not be part of the
Chinese
government
so American
companies began some years ago to be a
little bit
worried
about what is going on in these Chinese
companies which comes out of a fantasy
that's what I think it is that the
Chinese
are a
aggressively moving into position to
cause difficulties for the United
States I don't think that's
true uh I do think that the American
Empire is declining and that the
Chinese either are going to be the next
Empire
or if we're lucky will be the sponsor
for a genuine
multilateralism will we'll see we don't
know yet and I don't know yet but I know
no one else knows yet
either I do know that the United States
everywhere is trying to stop slow
constrain and constrict
China the containment policy that they
believe worked on Russia has now been
adapted or extended to apply to China
That's why they held back the chips
which didn't succeed because of what
happened with deep seek all right that's
why
they all of a sudden got interested in
Taiwan again that's why the seventh
fleet is in South China
Sea
[Music]
um so here the president can show he's
doing something against China look the
problem is the United States
ability to slow down and stop China has
so far proven to be zero they can't do
anything um I want to remind people who
might question
this leading government spokesmen and
women have been saying for at least 10
years if not
longer
that we need need to put more we the
Americans need to put more pressure to
constrict and constrain China didn't use
those words but that's what it amounted
to why because the
expectation this is sort of the official
line the
expectation in the minds of Henry
Kissinger and Richard Nixon when they
went to China ended the refusal to
recognize the government of China
let's remember the communists come to
power in
1949 and and Kissinger and Nixon go to
China in 1970 early 70s okay so whoa
that's a long time when you pretended
they're not there you would not send an
ambassador you would not receive an
ambass all of
that what that meant was that the
Japanese and the Europeans got to do
productive and profitable trade with
China Americans were excluded they
didn't want that anymore and so okay
open
up that was the real reason then the the
the BS official was this is going to
help integrate China into the world
economy moving it closer to the liberal
democracy that we have it's hard for me
to repeat this nonsense but it's the
official line we were all supposed to
wait for China there to come around when
it came time to bring them into the
World Trade
Organization which was necessary for the
benefits to American companies of being
able to deal with
China the same BS was we
recycled by letting them into the World
Trade they would become more like us
which of course means freedom democracy
apple pie and baseball
okay um good things
absolutely
uh starting 10 or 15 years
ago it became
clear particularly to the kind of
American politician who came to be known
as a
neocon uh for good reason um began to
realize that this strategy wasn't
working
that it was enabling China to grow like
blazes
economically but it wasn't becoming more
like us at all the Communist party was
still the the the controlling political
element it managed the state and the
state
supervised a hybrid economy one half
private capitalist Enterprise one half
government own owned Enterprise which is
more or less the way it is
now uh and the New York h
decided and
used Clinton Obama and Biden to
articulate they persuaded them or so
they became the Democratic Center
championed by
Clinton um
that China was a a net enemy it that we
bringing them into the World Trade
thing was too good for
them number one and number two
wasn't doing which by the way some of
them were honest enough to say regime
change you know a liberal Democratic
parliamentary
system and so it became
necessary to constrain and constrict and
limit and punish and hurt
them
um and because of the legacy of the Cold
War again sitting down with this Chinese
to try to say
look you're declining Empire we're a
rise Empire we can come to blows over
that Lord knows human history gives us
examples or we can try to find a way to
share the
planet let's at least
try this sharing the
planet after
all the last quarter of the 20th century
was a time when both the United States
and China experienced pretty good
economic growth
together um the
neocons Mash that they didn't didn't
want that kind of talk then we have to
Crystal Clear like with the Soviet Union
and remember the Soviet Union
conveniently implodes in 1989 so there's
the see the success it worked Reagan was
able we defeated them okay so we have a
plan how to do it doe to the Chinese
what we did to the Russians it worked
with the Russians it should work so the
they're very upset now it didn't it
didn't they didn't change anything now
of course with half a brain you might
have said to
yourself China went from one of the
poorest countries on Earth in
1949 to a superp power economically
speaking in 30 to 40 to 50
years what incentive would would there
be for the government of a country that
had that record to change itself are you
talking are you crazy that's their
success they give that up would what you
know it it's it's crazy it's a crazy
thing to imagine that that would happen
um and it didn't happen so they don't
know what they that they made a mistake
in their strategy
Americans can't do that
made a mistake no never make a mistake
like Mr Trump he's in that way he's not
nor never he always doubles down or
tells us another story but that's not
unique to
him so the Panama Canal is a way to hit
the Chinese that's all it it
says um we may close it we may not let
you through now could they do that
anyway sure what's the point so here
comes the
theater holding back China is a
complicated game because it's only half
real because in the last 40 years the
Chinese not only grew but the American
dependency on China also grew for goods
and
services look the the what you have to
pay an American worker is much less than
it would have been if you could not
unload
cheap Chinese consumer goods on
everybody your pants your shirt your
your car your toaster your shaving
equipment it's all made in China or was
still most of it
is that cheapens the cost of living for
workingclass people which allows you to
pay them less money because they can
still go to the mall and pick up at
Walmart or Target all of that junk which
comes from China
and which is distributed in America by
Walmart and Target you marriage made in
heaven now those two companies have to
be very careful never to say that but if
you look at it it's no secrets easy to
show Walmart and China Walk hand in hand
for the last 50 years they need each
other
dreadfully Walmart is against all these
tariffs it doesn't want to have to
charge the people who go to Walmart more
money because it knows who those people
are and it knows what this all means now
that's true for Dollar General and
dollar stores and all the rest of it so
American strategies always split you
have to posture punish constrict and
constrain but you have to also deal with
the realities of the and the Chinese
know that the Chinese are gambling the
time is on their side they keep grow
this year I like to tell this to people
because Americans don't
know I would say since Trump's election
even before but since Trump's election
the chorus of articles in places like
the financial times the Wall Street
Journal and so on talking about the
really great performance of the American
economy is amazing to me what are you
talk 2.8% maybe that's the best of the
various estimates they're many quite
lower but 2.88% United States GDP grew
in 2024 the year just
ended that's according to the IMF which
is a pro-western institution that's
their number there're is good or better
than anybody else who does this kind of
number the same IMF says that this year
in 2024 the growth in China 5%
double in India 7% triple what India and
China are the two Central players in
something called The
Bricks the gap between the bricks and
the G7 that's the American AG is
therefore growing as it has every one of
the last 25 years you're not in great
shape if that if that Gap app is growing
you're not or at least let's put it this
way it's very odd to talk about what a
great shape you are and leave discussion
of this out because from this angle it
ain't so
great but we live in a country where it
was necessary I want to remind you I'm
sure you
noticed but the whole last two years of
the Biden
Administration the following phenomena
really irritated
people the economy all the economics
people were were doing great the
president doing great but poll after
poll of the American people said the
economy is a number one problem we have
so there was Article after article which
went like
this why are the American
people
misunderstanding the reality of the
economy and there were lots of advice to
the Democrats be careful you're going to
get hurt in the election you've got to
make people understand just the idea
that the PE that the economists might be
looking at the wrong thing and the
massive people looking at something else
and that that would explain why they had
a different no could not raise the most
obvious why you had to make one side or
the other stupid
so the mass of the people are ill
informed inadequately what are you doing
you have the greatest control over mass
media of any society and you have for a
long time if the masses don't get it
what's the matter with your system
you've gotten to believe everything else
you need you you can't get this they
couldn't and they couldn't break out of
it and it did hurt them in the election
but I'm here to tell you that the
American economy is in
terribly difficult
conditions and now the
anxiety that he's provoking this
particularly with I'm cutting back I
have a a good friend a woman who
works in a shelter in New York
City several hundred people live in this
shelter
and they were going to
close this coming
August she explained to me yesterday it
has been moved up till March because the
government money is dry up and then they
had a scare last week when he issued
that order because some official in
Washington told them they might have to
close this next week dumping several
hundred people onto the streets of New
York City
at this time of year at this time of
year so they can join the others
sleeping in the subway tunnels of New
York City and also since a number of
these people
have fairly serious emotional or mental
problems who know New York my wife my
wife will not go in the subway anymore
she's afraid she's afraid of
random physical
violence which particularly affects
women um you know this a person's not
even about to steal who just comes up
and bashes you in the head with a Breck
or something because you remind them of
their mother or their cousin or some bad
moment in their lives or something you
know it's just whoa so I could give you
endless statistics but it's an economy
in a lot of
trouble and here again the notion of
irrelevance it's not that what he does
has no impact it
does but there's no link
between a concerted
strategic approach to a clearly
defined logical
Target that's why the naughty and the
theatrics seem to be mostly what this is
about poking liberals in the eye you
know being a offensive in your language
being dramatic I'm taking the canal I
want Greenland screw NATO screw Denmark
and all of
this what's it for I he's not going to
help the situation with any of those
countri Denmark
Europeans I can assure you are up in
arms that for
them they never heard of this a member
of NATO is basically taking the property
of another member of NATO the whole
point of NATO was not to have this you
know they used to tell each other how
they have to love each other and take
care of each other because of the big
Russian bear that bearing down on
them what happened to the Russian Bear
you know why are
you and so the fear this is a whole
another conversation we ought to
have this is the end of Europe as a
major player in the world economy and
that has not happened for centuries and
people not to understand that that is
going to be a traumatic feature of the
of our lives in the years ahead are not
not understanding what's going on these
the turmoil inside these countries the
loss of the war in Ukraine the end of
NATO all of these things are
happening and meanwhile Europe
has no role in the Innovative economy of
the future it's all the United States
and above all China
and deep seek happens in China it
doesn't happen in Germany or England or
and those economies if Germany is in
recession now it its GDP is negative
shrinking used to be the engine of
Europe the you know in German it's
called vfts V
you know it's the economic Miracle you
know Germany coming back losing the two
world
wars and now it's it's a basket case it
can't
function and you know the
irony it's their
americanism that killed them when the
United States
decided to have this war in Ukraine to
set zalinsky up to fight the Russians
with American money and American weapons
they demanded the falty of the
Europeans to provide money and to
provide weapons which they
did and since the military prospects
weren't so good they waged a sanctions
war against Russia the most important
part of which was Europe's refusal to
continue continue to buy cheap oil and
gas from Russia which is the world's
second greatest source of cheap oil and
gas and to make the point clear remember
they cut the can they cut the
underwater uh
pipeline okay so who's the biggest user
of cheap oil and gas
Germany turns out v v was because you
had cheap energy which nobody else could
compete with because the Russians
provided it at dirt cheap prices you
take so they
refused they had to turn them for their
energy to the World Market including the
United States which now ships huge
quantities of liquefied natural gas to
the Europeans at a much higher price the
Germans can't compete the German
industry is leaving Germany for the
first time in 60 years the the number
one company in Germany Volkswagen is
closing factories and laying off
thousands of workers and therefore
having enormous conflict with the
powerful
Union what's going on here is it
possible the whole world asks that the
Americans and the
Europeans couldn't
see that when you punish
Russia with sanctions that stop you from
buying oil and gas that they will find
someone else to sell it to and maybe the
bricks that they're part of would have
the shinese and the Indians buy the O
and gas which is what
happened that they didn't see
it is the level of denial and delusion
so deep that we're going to see one
horrific miscalculation like this after
another everywhere in Europe it is
understood that the war in Ukraine is
being
lost except here before we return to
some of those other rhetorical
flourishes of trump I would like to talk
about two domestic policy
that I think really nicely bring
together some of the other things we've
been talking about like oil Gas Energy
competition with the bricks that are
really trouncing us and even the LA
wildfires and that is Trump's climate
change
policies
because I mean here are the the here's
the sort of tangle that I see one uh it
seems like climate change I mean some
people on on the right for
instance don't believe that there is any
right but it might prove an existential
issue for us as evidenced by La again
ostensibly but then on the other hand as
far as economic competition goes it
seems like some of our competitors
aren't beholden to the
same climate change measures that we've
been taking in the United States and so
repealing them might better enable us to
compete with the countries to whom we're
seeding our
dominance there's
a risk that the climate people are right
and that the rising temperature of the
oceans and pollution levels are very
dangerous for our
future there's a risk they're right
there's also a risk that the people who
don't believe any of that are right
I
agree I don't know first of all I'm not
such a scientist I'm not up on all of
that I see a risk on both
sides but I must say it seems obvious to
me that we'd be better
off not risking that the right wing is
correct let's take the other one let's
do the steps we think will
help because if they if it's right it's
our existence rather than than play
Russian roulette with the right wing and
say well it's not certain so let's not
worry about
it what what why would you do
that I don't understand and when you
look at who's spending the money to
convince everybody then it becomes
obvious doesn't it it's Exxon and mobile
and all the U is the rightwing together
with the big businesses that are funding
them so for me oh boy so on the one hand
we have alarmist scientists I get it and
they may be alarmist Beyond what's
appropriate that's possible I understand
there's a risk that that's
wrong but on the other hand I see
self-interested corporations promoting
something that holds on to the profit of
their fossil fuel
foundations uh and people who are saying
it might be wrong but I'm saying yeah it
might be wrong but wouldn't we be better
off taking steps to deal with it than
not I don't get I don't see what
reputation there is to this so I end up
with the people who want to do stuff
about it who want to limit our and since
I see it dovetailing with other things
it I think the private car is a
ridiculous notion we oughtn't to do that
the single largest polluter of air is
the automobile exhaust so you know for
me let's have public
transportation let's go back to the
collective housing we once had back at
the end of World War II and that was a
serious project here in the United
States let's take the steps that would
mitigate global warming and all the of
it because that's the
lesser the path that makes more sense
and in order to say that I don't have to
denounce the people who are skeptical
about all of it I I understand Bas it's
Bas is to be skeptical I don't like the
lineup of who's telling me to be SK
skeptical but I I understand the
Skeptics may be right I don't want to
get into position where I know
scientific that I'm not going there my
liberal friends do that they don't need
me and I don't agree with them anyway
about it does it for me
that's Mr Trump has made his decision he
panders to the fossil fuel he panders to
the audience that those companies have
created for him the because the
establishment politically adopted at
least a public commitment to climate
control attacking the establishment
works if he attacks you know he attacks
this is the elitists in California who
give a about all of
this you know he's he is a one trick
pony Mr Trump you could see it when they
had the awful American Airlines army
helicopter crash in Washington DC few
days ago and Mr Trump has to talk About
It by blaming the diversity equality
inclusion movement for having created
the inadequate airport management you
know extra you know it it's it that goes
back to Victor Davis Hansen and Los
Angeles Wildfire response the same idea
that it's this leftwing ideological
captured incompetence that has caused a
lot of should air traffic
controllers yeah as I said it's a one
trick point it this is an attempt to
make
it look when you asked me earlier why do
I do economics I showed you
that I hope I did I hope I showed you
that I'm not arguing that economics is
more important than anything else I
don't believe it is I never had mhm I
focus on it no question but not because
it's the most important thing I focus on
it because it was the excluded taboo
issue and that Drew me and I still think
that's the Americans are afraid of
thinking and talking about the economics
of things because of where it takes you
and what it where the political end of
that conversation is I think that's why
they they hold back from it
but Hansen that's a different AR he
focuses on you know these elitism or
the because he really thinks that's the
key item he he actually think the key
item I don't think the economics are the
key item of anything but I am
struck by the
exclusion of the economic dimension of
things it's it's extraordinary and I I'm
going to talk about that because you
don't want to I I think that has
something to teach us and I'm going to
stress that but I'm not going to say
this is the cause so if anthon and I
were were debating he would say this is
why it happened and because you the
elite and then not me I'm not going to
no no didn't bad it was this you
know well if you're ever in the the bay
area again maybe I could arrange I go
there every I go to the Bay Area as
often as I can I really find it a
wonderful place I like that City I admit
I like the climate I like the ocean I
like it's just a people are very
friendly it's
a very attractive place for me but New
York City is also even don't have those
qualities you know I like New Orleans I
like New York I like San Francisco
the other thing I I wanted to bring up
right now isn't so much a a policy issue
but just a a a broader domestic economic
issue going forward and one that I think
your Marxist or marxian you've been
using that word analysis might be really
helpful with it also connects to deep
seek
automation electric vehicles and that is
the role of Advan ments in AI
in the competition between China and the
United States and also just the overall
health of our domestic
Workforce I don't know quite how to get
at what it is I would want to
say uh about that China has demonstrated
now and I believe this is true to almost
every reasonable person whether they
like China or not uh whether they
support what China is or
don't they have demonstrated that
economic
growth can be
achieved faster in their kind of system
than it can in any other
country and that is a momentous I mean
just that's a momentous
achievement over the last 30 to 40
years they have consistently
grown as measured by their
GDP two to three times faster than the
United
States I must remind people even though
they hate to hear it that before this
Speedy
growth the Soviet Union
accomplished Speedy
growth not as fast but Speedy growth so
that
the painful reality so painful it can't
be spoken is that the 20th and 21st
centuries
demonstrated the growth potential and
the growth
actuality most effectively in the Soviet
Union and
China if you look at the Soviet Union as
the first experiment in what I'm about
to describe as their economic system and
China as the
second right Russia starts in
1917 uh China in 1949 that's quite a
difference but by now we have 70 years
roughly 70 years the Soviet Union and
now 70 years of China and the Chinese
grow faster more
spectacular than the
Russian the Russian were a system of
State Enterprises throughout
industry and a growing proportion of
State
Enterprises in
agriculture and very little scope for
capitalist
Enterprises throughout that time not
zero that's an American fantasy but
small
China is completely
different China made a
decision
afterm to become a
hybrid to be partly
state-owned and operated
Enterprises
half and the other half private
capitalist Enterprises both Chinese and
external
allowed so that I think it's fair to say
that China represents a
hybrid trying to
combine
both the benefits of a private
capitalism Model United
States and of a state-owned and operated
enterprise
system example the Soviet Union they
really are a
5050
split with the hybrid of these two
systems
overseen by a Communist party and a
powerful State apparatus controlled by
that
party
[Music]
and they've
achieved really an
unspeakable story
let me give you one statistic just to
get put in your
head the GDP of the United States 28
trillion bucks more or
less the GDP of
Russia our former Arch Enemy
today is three or4
trillion no content no nothing and that
was always true I only in
the Cold War Legacy mentality of the
United States did Russia
Loom you
know
Silly economic
nonsense
anyway that's not true with
China China's GDP
now 18 19 20 trillion dollar
way
different from
Russia and equally so from anywhere
else Britain's GDP I don't know four
five six trillion something like that
very small bigger than Russia though
what bigger than Russia probably bigger
than Russia yeah and and Russia fighting
NATO means Russia's fighting Britain
France
Germany Italy is refusing that's
but look what China has done China was
one of the poorest countries on the
planet in
1949 and is now number two
unquestionably number two after the
United States and each year closing the
Gap
um that is an
astounding achieve is very very hard for
me not to dwell on it but one of its
components and one of the reasons it it
has the achievement will go take us to
the technology
issue a powerful Communist Party ruling
a powerful State
apparatus supervising this
hybrid can do something
quickly and
efficiently that the United States
either can't do or can't do quickly and
efficiently it can mobilize the entire
economy to achieve certain
priorities it can mobilize the
government sector in its ways and the
private sector in its ways it can force
them to collaborate and coordinate so
that the resources each has are brought
together to attack a
problem it does not
respect private profit as the
priority which is what happens here it
does not believe the private has to be
given Primacy in some sense as happens
here it doesn't have a government filled
with people who believe that the private
is in some sense the more important the
more patriotic the more deserving the
more what it doesn't have any of
that in fact it has the
other one of
the elements of Socialism or
communism that has a real effect here is
that the people involved in the public
sector believe in
it respect it
even value it higher than the
private in recent years in China you
have seen
programs
punishing leading private capitalists
Jack Mah and others like
that kind of dressing them
down in some cases imprisoning them but
mostly culturally saying you are not yet
we will let you be a billion
we
will and we will let you run your
business but when you
overstep in this hybrid we're going to
give you a a slap on the wrist or worse
because you're not and there's enormous
support in the public sector for that
Americans have a very hard time grasping
how different this is
here in the United States just by
comparison the presumption
is
that government is a
bureaucracy full of unnecessary people
the
fat so we economic fat
so Mr Trump gets a lot of support
for nominating the head of a private
bureaucracy Mr musk to clean out the
public
bureaucracy as if him being the
proprietor of another bureaucracy didn't
disqualify him what why what are you
doing what are you doing this man has an
enormous bureaucracy that was he has a
business that spans the whole world or
multiple businesses that Spann the whole
world he's got a complicated overlapping
mess of a the bureaucracy like all
bureaucracy but no no no no no instead
the mentality is the private
bureaucracy is efficient lean effective
it's always the public bureaucracy that
isn't though that's a completely
different way of thinking about and it
translates into different little
decisions along the way you know made in
this office in Idaho and that office in
Vermont and because of this private
profit a private public notion
remarkable I think it it it enabled Xi
Jinping the current leader in
China to realize that the efforts of the
United States to constrict and constrain
China Focus as they were on among other
things artificial
intelligence meant that in
order to have a
chance China could mobilize its
resources in a way that Europe could
not Europe didn't have the hybrid
economic systems way too much
private and they did have National Unity
too much tension among the countries of
the EU so they could not mobilize not
across the public private boundary not
across the national boundary so they
couldn't and they didn't but the
Chinese who had less of some kinds of
resources than Europe if you take Europe
as a
total they
could and then not going to change
this because it's working that's why
they are able now to compete in AI
That's what the importance of the deep
sea explosion was it wasn't the details
of one program versus another these are
learning they call learning
modules what this is about is a sign
which is by the way a number of American
commentary made this and they're right
they compared it to 1957
and because I'm old enough I was Al lar
that I remember it
1957 was when Russia Soviet Union then
sent up a man in space a
Sputnik uh Yuri Gagarin I remember the
name of the Russian astronaut who was
there and America went
crazy because the whole notion that we
were number one meant that we Americans
would be the first in space and here
were not just another country that would
have been bad enough but the bad country
had done it you
know this is comparable it's a sign that
a country we thought was far behind us
isn't and I think you've seen a kind of
Quasi hysteria already in Washington as
the whole establishment
reinforces itself no stop even though
the war in Ukraine is when Russia we
really should be focused on
China my guess I don't know of course
but my
guess that if Mr
Trump delivers on his promise to end the
war in
Ukraine he will do so in the name of
focus ing on the much greater danger
represented by
China the truth of it is the Chinese at
this
point are not our problem because they
don't
need all they want is free trade all
they want is to be allowed to do in the
future who what they've done in the past
it's the United States that has to have
a change because it's terrified by the
growth that the Chinese have achieved
and that they look likely to continue
and therefore they have to be stopped so
what Americans cannot understand because
they don't want to face it is that it's
not that the Chinese are
aggressive it's really the reverse it's
the United States that's aggressive
because it needs to stop what's going on
the Chinese
don't for the Chinese let's go you know
they we know how to go we know how to
beat you we know how to grow we do it
better than you do so just let us and
the United States says we won't we're
going to stop you we going to slow you
and it's almost as naked as that if you
look at the press these
days and you know it's a question of
whether the
Americans have the means I don't think
they do and have the determination they
may have that
uh to stay with this
policy I like to remind them that after
Britain tried twice to punish the United
States for becoming
independent Revolutionary War war of
1812 they gave up and they basically
worked out a deal Americans would leave
them alone in the rest of the world do
their British Empire and the British
would respect that the United States now
had an Empire called the R Doctrine you
can take this Western Hemisphere we're
taking everything else and on that basis
we can all live happily together and
they didn't they didn't go to war
against each other since that time okay
so why not the United States sit down
with China and do more or less the same
I don't understand why that isn't talked
about and be I don't think that's
because it isn't enough option I think
it is and I think Americans somewhere
know that it is but for the moment
they're all excited that they may have
the ability just to blow the Chinese
away the way the Russians went away and
I think that's a mistake but that's
where we sit we're definitely going to
come back to China because we need to
end this conversation talking about the
ultimate fate of the United States and
China is of course going to play a huge
role in that but there are still those
those two rhetorical issues that I
wanted to talk about that we haven't
gotten to yet and I think the first one
that you mentioned in our conversation
is Greenland and whether we need to take
it uh from Denmark or so what is the the
context here why would Trump I mean
Greenland just seems like a non- entity
I I don't really think about it that
often except we fly over it sometimes on
our way to Europe why would Trump make
this move was this a strategic move what
is he trying to get successful
unsuccessful there are multiple factors
it's never ever reducible to one it's
multiple saber
rattling against a tiny country like
Denmark is a tasteless piece of Bluster
so I assume part of what's going on here
is this it's
just Bluster it's just Mr Trump being
this is something nobody would say or do
in the modern way you don't you don't
have relationships between countries
handled in this way it's just not done
and so he does it so that's one thing
that's going on
here number two he
wants and the argument is now getting
stronger because of it he seems to want
to disrupt and dismember and Destroy
NATO because this
certainly makes NATO look like nothing
if it goes through it already makes it
look like nothing that this could even
happen uh
[Music]
um now that's a whole conversation what
would the Lo logic be but I remind you
what I said earlier I can tell you a
logic for why
Mr Mr Trump might want to get rid
of um
NATO but I would be articulating
something further and better than
anything he has said or anyone one
speaking for him has said so I'm not
sure it's a me trying to come up with a
strategic
rationale I mean it would be me doing it
but I would have no way of knowing
whether or not something like this is in
the minds of the because they're not
saying anything like that
so who
knows I I
don't I don't see in him the Strategic
logic third there already are mil mil US
military bases in Greenland they've been
there for
years so the notion that this is a
security but there's not the slightest
evidence that anybody else is
encroaching whatever that might mean on
the US
bases the Danish government has not said
a word to indicate that it doesn't want
them on the contrary in the days since
Trump started they have offered more
bases to the United States than they
already
have uh
so I don't
see he says it's National Security you
know I have no
idea if you're looking for the chin
Chinese they don't have any role there
particularly
so could they come one day yeah but
that's true anywhere they could come one
day and sit outside the harbor in any
country on earth
I so I find it
very bizarre does Mr
Trump want to have the privilege for his
sons
to grab property and start building
hotels and golf court in Greenland yes
you know what the argument there is
which Mr Trump has articulated oh really
I missed that not this time earlier okay
he articulated the
argument that you love this climate
change which you doesn't believe it
means that it's getting
warmer and Greenland will be melting its
ice and more and more green land will
become livable that's a nice little
contradiction yes you like that one and
he wants to be he said this he wants to
build hotels and golf courses by the way
that's what you know that's what he does
doesn't do it well lots of them are
losing money but he does that he likes
that sort of the real estate Patrician
notion of having arrived so so that
might be I mean you know he make can
make sure as president that his kids get
the prime real estate rather than the
shitty real estate whatever
um so when I make those
arguments since nobody else has
expressed any interest there's no
competitive you know Britain or Denmark
and
nobody uh that I know of is e for green
Lin so I'm I go back to the beginning
this
is Mr tough
guy and if I were going to
play amateur
psychologist not just for Mr Trump but
for the establishment here in the United
States then I'd come up with the the
following to do the four things at once
that he did
I'm going to take Panama Canal I'm going
to take Greenland I'm going to make
Canada the 51st state and I'm going to
rename the Gulf of Mexico yeah not so
much
that I'm going to hit Mexico with
tariffs
deportation then this is classic
American
politics that's National ISM it it's
it's the glorification of the nation as
the power that rules the world we're
going to do this to this country and
this to that
country it goes
with the territory it's
what a
leader should
do you know
Mr Trump said at the night of the
election when he couldn't claim a
mandate he talked a lot about Unity is
going
to presidents usually do after
elections there hasn't been much Unity
no no there hasn't been and you can and
and there hasn't been even much talk I
mean he did it the night of the election
not much after that not much talk well
the country can get United around its
Empire
and this is we're sticking it to
panamanians Danes Canadians and mexicus
he we Americans
are our
leader this well that does seem like a
good strategic move if it helps bolster
support for him by uniting people under
a nationalist I think you I think people
are are now sufficiently I think
excuse me I think we are sufficiently
weaned
away from the neoliberal globalization
period when an enormous effort was made
to teach us to be okay
with factories running away because the
global economy would deliver goods and
services more cheaply than otherwise and
everybody wins from the
one never true but a nice story to tell
we've been weaned off of
it so now it's okay the president can
give billions to this industry billions
to that industry hit the market with all
of the stuff about don't tax out the
window all of the stuff about the free
market don't interfere in the fre he's
interfering every day you know he's
tariff is an interference in the fre me
it is the
taboo the Republican taboo we W tax we
don't interfere in the free market and
thereby we make your life better was
always but it was their
 you know many elections won by
Republicans were won because they
promised either not to raise taxes or to
cut them they are the anti and now
they've become the protax
party like they become what free
market F the free market we don't like
this we don't like this we're going to
interfere this way here we're going to
interfere that way over there staking
countries is
not leading things to the free market
you are not doing that it's a
nationalist turn and it will be
justified on the same grounds that
nationalist turn always have been which
is threat from
abroad and you can then articulate it as
fenil coming into your country that's
one threat abroad or vague aggressive
actions by the
Chinese which you know the Chinese go
out of their way to say we don't you
know we don't want interfere in any of
we just let us grow um so I I think
China has figured out how to the bottom
line how to
mobilize its
resources to achieve its priority
targets and the number one priority
target has been rapid Economic
Development and they've achieved it
better sooner than even they imagined
nor did anyone else outside
foresee or even keep up
with when I began to pay attention to
the Chinese
economy which in my case was in the the
1960s and70s
for for two or three decades after that
every piece of work and I wrote my
Master's thesis on the Chinese
economy um at Stanford where I did it um
you always were told here's this the
statistic you're looking for but you
can't count on the Chinese I mean
they're probably making it
though year in no matter what their
achievement was including achievements
like going to major cities in China I
don't know if you've been and seeing
that these are very modern cities with
Rapid Transit that's better than that of
the United States and so on no matter
what people so they needed to say that
the
statistics are manipulated are are hyped
in one way or
another now people have stopped doing it
because I mean in the end you can see
what they're capable of doing it's it's
they have the equivalent of of alphabet
you know Google Apple Intel all have
their counterparts in China plus an
explode expion of small companies by the
way I meant to mention that one of the
nice things that deep seek shows
Americans who are willing to look at it
is that the notion that there's a
significant difference between socialism
and communism because
communism provides
incentives and commun excuse me
capitalism provides incentiv
and
capitalism doesn't
regulate and capitalism
therefore stimulates
efficiency that the
China if you assume it's socialist which
is what it calls itself
socialism well they
obviously they're not holding back
entrepreneurialism deep seek many other
is an entrepreneur deep seek as an
Enterprise was formed in May of
2023 it's a one and a half year old new
startup wow the the Chinese call it a
startup they borrow the American name a
startup so and there's lots of companies
like that there's about 30 if I have it
right about 30 companies working on
electric vehicles so it's not just be
it's not Monopoly companies the way we
have here it's it's actually easier to
start a business and to grow a business
I can't tell you how many people that I
talk to in the United States have a an
what the French called an eay fix you
know a fixed notion that one of the
virtues of capitalism relative to
socialism is that it spawns and favors
Innovation I would have been one of
those people yes it spawns and favors
efficiency it all
ows entrepreneurs to the Chinese do all
of that they always have but what what
where did this come from this is pure
propagandistic even if it had a grain of
truth I'm not aware it does but it may
that I'm not aware of it's
not it's not some fixed it's
silly this guy uh who started deep sea
May of 23
he had a background of technical he had
a technical background but he was also
active in finance he straddled these two
and he saw an opportunity and he got
together a group of engineering type
recent graduates as I told you not I
made a little firm and went to work on a
project that's what he did you know
which is the story of a startup in
Silicon Valley multiplies 50 times or a
thousand times whatever it is but you
have that that there too and you know
it's common sense if you think about it
the Chinese prioritize economic
growth they're practical people in the
same way Americans
were so they said of
course one of the things we have to do
is look at the United States figure out
how they did it and go them one better
if we
can that's everybody does that and
that's what they did but they have
enough people and enough resources and
enough capability to mobilize them to do
it so you know in a way they figured it
out the the stilted all know socialism
is clunky and cumbersome the government
is
everywhere it's
childish well it's that head in the sand
mentality you
know if things don't develop the way you
thought they
would then you ought to go back to the
drawing board and wonder about your
assumptions because you thought this but
this happened all right socialism isn't
Innovative okay the Chinese have their
the best electric cars the Chinese have
new AI the Chinese the Chinese you
know they
innovated well they copy yes there was
some copying going on no doubt they
stole some the technology
probably but you know if you know
anything about
history that's really not relevant
everybody who can steals everybody who
can copies but the Chinese have done
and the folks in Belgium
haven't and the folks in Italy haven't
and the folks in Germany haven't and the
folks in England haven't whoa whoa and
the Americans thought they could they
were years ahead it turns out they're
not etc etc etc then it's time to ask
yourself you
know since we've touched on Marxism
here's another parallel when the Soviet
Union collap csis the first national
experiment in a socialist
economy marxists were confronted with a
with a really serious problem because
what was done in Russia was done in the
name of Marxism we are marxists building
a socialist economy so the Russians had
a real serious problem you fell apart
the thing you created wasn't sustainable
we have the proof it's gone you know it
fell
upon everybody who wasn't a Marxist
piled in and said AR you failed because
socialism do the work I don't know kind
of a quicky summary of the story now the
marxists either had to come up with
their own alternative
explanation or they'd be stuck with a
very bad
result because the argument of the rest
of the world or much of it was that here
is the proof that socialism isn't
Innovative it doesn't allow build the
business socialism doesn't work
right
and it forced
marxis to go back and say what did we
get wrong what what did we not see we
didn't see that this experiment would
fall apart
not even by some outside in Invasion or
a war none of it it just fell apart we
missed something we we better ask pretty
basic questions about our analytical
framework
Marxism or to say the same thing in
other words marxists had better come up
with their own explanation of what
happened or else the notion that
socialism doesn't work will kind of take
the day it will have won the the
debate and so a variety of people myself
included did that I spent 10 years of my
life writing a book with my colleague
stepen Resnik a man that I worked with
also a professor of Economics like me uh
we spent 10 years writing a book on what
happened to Soviet Union why did it fall
apart what and what does that tell us
and the bottom line you know your
audience might be interested book is
available it's in print you can get it
what's it called what called
Theory wrong title Theory and history
colon capitalism and communism in the
USSR so
published by Routledge a big
International Publishing House rout
ledge available in in English all over
the world um been translated into bunch
of other languages to anyway
um here's what we found just to give you
an idea of how basic we asked the
question which is what I'm demanding in
a sense of people who misunderstood
where the United States was going
relative to China we came to the
conclusion
that the notion of socialism and
communism had been
taken in a
direction after Marx's
death by his
followers that we believe
produced an unfortunate
outcome and the outcome
was that socialists
thought that what they were Pro about
was to go beyond
capitalism in the sense of
depriving private owners of the means of
production private
entrepreneurs from their position and
their
power in order to collectivize to make
the economy something the community as a
whole undertakes not private
[Music]
subgroups because of the
contradiction simple idea that if a
private group of people are running an
Enterprise they run it to maximize that
Enterprise not the needs of society and
that those don't always work out and
that the society's needs can go
unfulfilled because the privates don't
do what you would need to do to fill
them an old idea fleshed out in the
century of writing by socialist mostly
in the 19th century and so they ended up
with a tension between the private
Enterprise and the state as the
representative of the community as a
whole which should and Russia makes a
revolution gets rid of the private
Enterprises and replaces them with
state-owned and
operated so that indeed the whole 20th
century is an endless debate between the
private and the public capitalism United
States private versus socialism Soviet
Union
public what we concluded make a long
story short what we
concluded was that Marx's Insight was
not
primarily about public versus private to
say the thing bluntly so the idea gets
across Marx didn't give a crap whether
the in production was done by private a
public that's surprising to me
that that's not what if you look through
the three volumes of capital which is
really the mature work that he leaves I
mean lots of other valuable stuff but
that's the core those three and one day
you and I are going to go over that in
detail absolutely I spend most of my
adult life teaching that as a as a Prof
I've taught people volumes 1 two and
three of capital
so for those that are interested if if
if you find what I have to say about the
American economy
interesting this may trouble you I'm
just applying Marxist economics don't
thank me it's
Marx and if that's new and interesting
to you I'm pleased but it tells us more
about what you didn't learn in your life
than anything else that's been there for
allall anyway if you look at volume one
which is the only of the three volumes
that marks himself actually wrote
volumes 2 and three occurred after Marx
was dead and gone was put together
Volume Two by his colleague Frederick
Engles and volume three because rles was
then dead by a German Marxist who came
after them named Carl kowsky so because
I teach this stuff I know this stuff
right so volume
one what Marx lays out there is a
critique of the capitalist way of
organizing an
Enterprise not whether it's state or Pro
you will not find in capital anything
about that it's not about whether state
or private is better or worse this way
that that's not Mark's not interested in
that never was barely wrote about the
state his work was what in capital
focused on the
Enterprise if I wanted to use modern
language I'd say Marx is a crit critic
of the microeconomic level of capitalism
not so much the macro the micro what
goes on in the Enterprise and his
argument there is that the capitalist
Enterprise is governed by defined
by the Ju position the the relationship
between the folks who run the Enterprise
the owner the top manager the board of
directors if you have a corporate form
and the mass of
employees that this relationship of
capitalism demonstrates that it didn't
make the break from slavery and
feudalism that it thought it
did Master Slave Lord surf
employer
employee and that the root of the
problems of capitalism are right there
that's a
problem the that way of organizing
creates
hostility
animosity introduces
inefficiency on a staggering basis and
then it blows
up and so if you want to make a
transition from capitalism to something
really
different you have to do it at the level
of the
Enterprise not that you don't talk about
public and private that's fine
Collective individual all that that's
perfectly part of a story you better
include the core and the core is have
you been willing and now I'm going to
use language for Americans to point hard
are you a Democrat with a small D or are
you not do you believe in democracy or
do you not because if you do it has to
start in the Enterprise one person one
vote everybody in the business has an
equal say in what happens because you're
all affected by the decisions what to
produce how to produce where to produce
and what to do with the product you're
all affected in an Enterprise by those
decisions but in capital ISM you're
excluded if you're an employee from
making them those are made by the
employer as they were in fism and
slavery by Lord and
Master therefore the core of
socialism would have to include whatever
else it is the transformation of the
Enterprise from the capitalist
hierarchical system to a worker Co-op
system that was not done in Russ Russia
and it wasn't done in China
either so that's the
issue that's what's going to be fought
out this Century that question speaking
of this Century we're we're nearing the
end of our conversation so I wanted to
shift back toward what we can expect
going forward and I think in our last
conversations our last two conversations
we've used this word
prognosticator uh soothsayer and we've
agreed that you're not a prognosticator
you're not a soothsayer but you do have
a nor is anyone else nor is anyone else
but you have a tremendous wealth of
historical information economical
information and if anything gives us a
hint about what's to come it's well
those are two of those things so I'm
wondering maybe with particular
reference to China to Donald Trump to
other Global states of Affairs what are
you expecting out of the next four
years um what I'm expecting and I want
to underscore I mean you're quite right
but I want to
underscore I'm not predicting I don't
have that power I don't think anybody
does
um I believe Mr Trump is going to be
overwhelmed by history nor is he alone
in that that has happened to most other
political leaders
they and often their adoring publics uh
overestimate how much they can
do um how much they understand so I
expect him to be
overwhelmed uh overwhelmed by the
decline of the Empire which is
continuing by the mounting economic
problems in the United States because of
the declining Empire in part and because
we have as a nation
a level of
ideological uh
obfuscation I'll be polite uh that makes
it hard for Americans to honestly face
their problems and and come to grips
with them and in some sense that's our
own fault as a people
but between that and the forces at work
Mr
Trump doesn't have the insights and I
don't just mean him but the his group
his team or whatever you want to call it
they don't have the insights that I see
they don't have the tools that I can see
to deal with the problems that I can see
so I think he will be overwhelmed things
will work out in a way he did not want
and did not foresee that certainly
happened to Mr Biden it certainly
happened to Mr Trump at the end of his
first
race uh and since he's a person given to
doubling
down uh he tried to be more in the
second time than he was in the first
time but along very similar lines only
more so uh and I don't think I don't
think that's going to solve any of the
problems except by accident now go back
to what I said at the beginning he's
going to be
throwing Hail Mary passes often and you
know what happens most of the time those
don't work very well sometimes they do
and that's the best he can
do and that's not so different from
others but it it's been my experience
that the situation shapes the leader far
more than the other way around and I
know that goes against more heroic
Notions but um that that's that's what I
see United States is going to have to
come to terms with a reduced position in
the
world uh it has been doing that poorly
for some years now so on one level it's
a
continuation but I I am a hegelian and I
understand that quantitative decline at
a certain point becomes a qualitative
shift you know with the old
model Rising temperature of water until
it at a certain point becomes gas or the
other way it becomes a solid with ice at
a certain point the adjustment downward
of the American economy is going to
shake the society by imposing a
qualitative uh shift I see the United
States if you want it argued a little
differently as headed in the
direction of wealthy
enclaves surrounded by a SE of
people in pretty tough economic
circumstances that used to be the way
the rest of the world or much of it
looked that's coming home to the United
States that's interesting and I don't
think I think Mr Trump has cashed in on
that philos on that phenomena he's
cashed in on the upset that this is
already creating when you get hints of
all
this but he is still
[Music]
able to cash in on it
politically let me give you an
example he can't
control even what happens in Mexico and
Canada so he has to be
aggressive and he has to do what doesn't
matter because he can't do what does he
wants to control Central America he
can't he just
can't but what he can do is insist on
changing the name of the Gulf of
Mexico what does that do it's the same
the next day after the name is changed
got the same trade the same movement of
people the same set of ecological
vulnerability what what what's it for
I mean it's clearly an affront to
Mexicans which you have to answer again
the qu what is the oh the grand eyes you
say whoa whoa this
game but you know that that's usually
the sign of a weakness not a strength
this is a
posturing about something that you can
do even though it doesn't matter because
you don't want people to understand what
you can't do it's the old Mo moment in
the western
film when the Outlaws have ridden into
town shot up the bank stole every nickel
in it and are riding out of town just as
the sheriff arrives blade having failed
in His function but he says with great
intensity round up the usual suspect and
he goes after the mouth what is this
he's covering over over his failure the
town doesn't want him to go get the bad
guys he wants the bad guys not to come
in the town does and not to do the
damage he failed to do but he's going to
show Mr Trump can
do the rearing of American he can't do
it every president of the last 10 has
promised to bring manufacturing back
here none of them succeeded that's a
clue he's not going to
either but he will tell you how he can
do what they all fail to do sure you can
sure you can and if you would like I
have this bridge between Manhattan and
Brooklyn that I will sell you a share in
and you being a Real Estate Mogul you
for sure will be gullible enough to give
me a few bucks for it I know so I don't
I don't think much is going to change
we're going to continue pretty much as
we are he is going to enjoy poking
liberal sensibilities by being
outrageous with immigrants which will
hurt many people by putting a tariff
which will hurt our economy in a whole
host of ways when the bad results happen
he will be right there to blame somebody
else so if there's a crash of airplanes
it's the bad people who want diversity
and inclusion right which has gone in a
record short time from being something
everybody nodded for because it's good
to now everybody's supposed to they bad
bad causes air crashes no this is
childish but it's a dangerous
childishness because it means you're not
looking at what's really quite in front
of
you I can see it one last point with the
Deep seek all these are I don't know if
you're aware but in the day after they
came up with it their entire computer
system was hacked and destroyed I mean
they'll fix it they know how but you
know somebody wants to shut them down
I'll give you three guesses who it are
but the first two you guesses don't
count so you get one guess and
so these are attempts to stop you can't
stop this you can't that's the history
of Technology you know we invented
patents and copyright
to try to make it illegal to slow down
what always happens which is copying and
in a sense isn't that what we want we
want people to make the next step so
that we can't just slow down the cancer
maybe we can cure it but to develop the
Cure let's see what we were able to do
with the you don't want people to do
that you know what that never works
people find a way around that this
sanctions that we impose on Russia the
world found ways around it Russia still
sells oil and gas in Europe believe it
or not but the Russian gas has to go to
India and change the ship and go and
there are ways around there always were
and there are
now the whole thing about the sanctions
was mostly for show to show Americans
look we are beating them hitting them
with a F16 and we're hitting them with a
we're we're losing H we're H it's the
sheriff he wasn't there that's a failure
no no no look at how we're Chasing The
Usual
Suspects a nation has to at some point
grow up the United States has to at some
point kind of grow up and look at these
things and not leave it to a relatively
small number of folks like me luckily
I'm far from alone a lot of folks who
are willing and able to stand up and say
hey
there's another Emperor here who's
actually naked you know that little boy
in the story we need a lot more little
boys and my hope is and it's not just my
hope I see it I want to end on that
because for example the labor movement
that we talked about earlier with the
decline for 50 years is turning up it's
turning up it's many of us wondered if
it ever would but it is is some of the
poorest paid workers some of those
undocumented immigrants included are not
willing to work at Starbucks under the
conditions of that employment or at
Amazon warehouses or at Fillin the blank
the fast food joints they are forming
unions a lot of them they're having
strikes they're developing new
strategies and I know it's not just
among the lowest paid teachers are doing
it around the country medical personnel
out in California the Kaiser Permanente
People Extraordinary solidarity across
unions among workers that's for me very
very hopeful and positive son my my
biggest regret about these things is
only that they're not further
along than they are the United States
needs a new Fresh
leftwing political
party this
uncomfortable coexistence inside the
Democratic party with a Centrist
establishment absolutely determined to
crush anything that comes from its left
wing whether it be Bernie Sanders or
Alexandria Okio Cortez or any of the
others th this is silly this doesn't
work there ought to be an
alternative Bernie Sanders when you ask
him will tell you that he knows that the
people who he
attracted were the people who ended up
voting for Trump in large numbers well
they didn't want the
establishment but going to the right was
only because there was no other place to
go there Bernie was crushed by the
Centrist
pushed out so he didn't he couldn't
offer himself Trump did to the middle of
the Republican Party namely wipe them
out what Bernie didn't try and didn't
achieve if he did try okay that's an
imbalance that has to be faced and let's
ask the question why does a country that
celebrates the freedom of choice limit
the political to two was it the magic
number most other countries have more
than two political parties that contest
including most of our European allies we
have to we don't need freedom of choice
in
politics
what where's that written what what why
do we permit the two parties to make it
impossible for third parties to get
going which they systematically do and
many of them will tell you how they do
it and I'm committed to it because we
live this strange public opinion in
America that we have the nation of
Freedom we want freedom of churs just
not
there o it's like that when I explained
to my European friends why do most
American cities have one
newspaper we want freedom of choice we
just want one why should we have
five in every village in France you can
go into the local Center as many do get
your cup of espresso and sit there
reading the paper and so you pick up a
copy of the paper in any French Village
and what can you get on the liberal Left
End Lon their New York Times if you
don't like that you get a national wling
paper called Le
Figaro and next to it on the Shelf is
lity Humanity that's the daily Daily
newspaper of the French Communist party
and it is not unusual to
see someone sitting there who's got all
three of them they because they want to
see how the news is treated differently
by the Communists and the right-wing
conservatives and the liberal left
socialists that's what they they
actually want and enjoy the freedom of
choice that Americans pretend to be
committed to this is
weird it may not strike anyone but
that's because it's really weird and you
haven't thought about it before and that
that's a
strange quality of the United States it
this this not goes back to the the
beginning of our
conversation when I told you that I got
into in economics because when I asked
questions in college about economics I
could see particularly when it had to do
with Revolution or Socialism or Marxism
I could see the fear in my Teacher's
eye but I learned to respect the fear
because it was better than what I often
found complete ignorance they couldn't
answer the question they had no idea
what Marxist criticisms were
they they had been so
traumatized as they were coming up in
the education system that they
understood Not only was it not smart to
say something Marxist it was not smart
to know anything don't read it don't go
find the teacher to teach you don't
don't
don't amazing you're going to study
capitalism you're going to study all the
people who love it and you're going to
exclude all the people who don't who
find it in insufficient or bad what kind
of an educate what kind of a society
does this is really how do you make it
better if you don't have people with the
criticism having a conversation just
showing you you know this could be
better don't you want that not if you're
scared enough not if you have revved up
the no we make fun or criticize of
societies that burn the books I used to
say to my teacher I guess America
doesn't have to burn the books because
you won't read them in any
case and they would grin and smile they
got the joke but they didn't go read the
book let me say a few things one Rick I
have been greedy and I have kept you for
far too long but this has been amazing
you always managed to outdo yourself and
I and our listeners
I'm sure are extremely grateful for this
conversation so thank you so much I hope
so I appreciate your keeping at it I
appreciate you translate or transform
all of these things
into things that can be
understood I don't have much
power but the power to affect the
conversation is the best I can do and
you become a crucial partner in that
which I hope is satisfy
to you as well as we do this thank you
but I mean it I really do mean it
[Music]
