those who brought capitalism out of
feudalism promised that it would come
with Liberty equality fraternity and
democracy as its gift and Marx looks
around Germany where he lives as a young
person and he basically notices that
whatever capitalism brought Liberty
equality fraternity and democracy aren't
among them because it's not it's very
unequal the poverty is all you know Marx
is living at the time described in
dickens's novels and so he says what
what happened and Marx's conclusion is
that capitalism is its own
obstacle Rick and I have spent a lot of
time talking about Marx you and I
haven't Michael so I just wanted to
start with this though please jump in at
any point if you got anything to to say
when was it that in your studies Marx
first became important for you that you
first took him serious I was 5 years old
oh really my father was a political
prisoner uh I grew up in Minneapolis and
uh that was the only country in the city
in the world that was a trosa city and
my father was one of the Union
organizers there uh when Minneapolis was
the center of the the truers Union uh uh
the strikes he edited the strike paper
he worked with trosy in Mexico
uh just before I was born uh and the
people that we had at the house when I
was growing up uh were all his fellow
socialists many of them had been in jail
with him or they were they'd come from
Europe they'd worked with Rosa Luxenberg
and Carl lick and uh they all uh because
I was young and they were old they
wanted to tell me all their stories so
somebody would remember the whole
history of Marxism so I grew up uh uh
with Marxism and my mentor uh Terrence
McCarthy uh was the translator of Marx's
theories of surplus value uh the first
translator into English uh only the
first volume was published because the
stalinists uh uh broke into the printer
poured acid over the plates and
prevented it from being published
because the one thing the Soviet Union
feared was uh that people would read
Marx's theories of surplus value and his
analysis of national income and realized
that what the Soviet Union was doing had
very little to do with Marxist economics
uh and uh I admit Terrence and I was 21
years old uh the condition of his me uh
mentoring me was that I had to read
every book in the bibliography of Marx's
there is a surplus value so I
accumulated a large collection of uh
classical economics and I my view of
Marx was the culmination of classical
political economy uh and I uh I saw that
uh the fight of people against Marxism
was really a fight against Adam Smith
and the physiocrats and John Stewart
Mill and everybody who talked about
value Theory uh and value uh and was uh
uh basically the intrinsic cost to
production reduced the labor but price
was much more than value it was unearned
income it was land rent it was Monopoly
rent and it was Financial rent and uh
the the fight against Marx was a fight
by the landlord class by uh the the
financial class especially in the uh the
Austrian School in Europe and JB Clark
in the United States uh that said
there's no such thing as uh unearned
income there's no such thing as economic
rent uh everybody earns whatever they
have there's no exploitation there no
Serv yeah and Marx is all about their
different kinds of
exploitation how does all that resonate
with you
very interesting I did not know this
about Michael's
background mine is a little different
there's some
overlap my parents weren't marxists but
they were European
intellectuals my father was born in
France my mother in Germany and in the
circles they
traveled as University
students you read the great
thinkers and that included Ed marks it
would have struck my father's teachers
or my mother's teachers as very odd not
to study marks so when I got to the
university here in the United States and
discovered that nobody studied
marks I realized I was in a very strange
Place given what my parents had led me
to expect you know my parents told me as
a child that the University was the
great place where
civilization was carried forward was
passed from one generation to another
and I arrived as a freshman you know
teach me teach me I wanted to
learn and but I had had a formation at
home that was infinitely
broader you know when I was in high
school for example my father gave me
Aristotle and Plato to read CU he was so
upset at the quality of what I was
getting in class in the high school and
I went to a pretty good high school you
know
um so when I came to
college very quickly there was a an
opposition set up and this goes to
something that you actually asked me
last Thursday
I was confronted by people who knew very
little about
Marx and when they talked about him
would
dismissive so he had this combination of
quick dismissal of something you clearly
didn't know and that doesn't take a
genius to figure out this is a taboo
you're you're you're you're unable to go
there and you but you have to cover it
with bravado but it's
clear but I was interested in those
kinds of
issues the marks that I had read a
little of before because my father gave
it to
me I wanted to pursue that they didn't
want to talk to me about it but I was
also brought up in a family where I had
to do well that was not to be
negotiated so I ended up spending four
years of my undergraduate life fighting
with my professors and I didn't fight
them confront them
because I was taught to respect
professors so that that was out of the
question what would happen and really it
happened all the time is I'd get a
lecture I would run I mean I would run
from the end of the lecture to the
[Music]
library uh it's a huge building it's
called Widener Library and it has
everything in it it's really a great
place if you're doing what I was doing
and I would run and read the literature
I needed to refute what the teacher had
done that was a better education than
the teacher gave me because it was
heavily
motivated as it would be for any
student and I taught
myself much of what I had to learn to
refute to teach it you know from Hegel
you
understand imitation is one form of
being influenced
opposition is just another form of being
influenced and I was influenced by that
plus I had and here becomes the overlap
there was a
fellow at in lived in Cambridge
Massachusetts few blocks from the
University who came knocking on my door
freshman year I didn't know the fellow
short guy with a mustache
heavy German
accent was a friend of my
father's long story short I won't bore
you with the details he said I owe your
father my
life and I would like to pay your father
back by offering you
something I are you interested in
Marxism yeah I said you kind of
wondering I mean he knew my father so he
might have got something like that from
my father I said yes I am he said said
well do you speak German which I do yes
I said the rest of the conversation was
in
German and he basically offered me a
tutorial in
Marxism while I was at
college and we did it and we went
through that's when I read for the first
time the theories of surplus value in
German it's you know it's very
interesting in German Surplus value is
called Mead
and the word me in German mehr simply
means more and it's much better for the
theory to understand there's more value
in this story than what the worker gets
the worker makes it but doesn't get it
the minute you get that idea in your
head everything opens up because that's
the theory of surplus so I learned it as
me V in the German word for
value and
you may know his name his name was Fritz
papenheim he wrote a book called The
alienation of modern man published by
the month review press here in New
York um and he was my tutor and took me
through the classics of Marxism step by
step and that was a wonderful lesson you
know was the best thing I got out of
college and it wasn't in this is Harvard
so it's supposed to be hoopsy doodle but
it isn't it wasn't then and it isn't now
I had to listen to to Kissinger explain
to me world affairs while Fitz papenheim
gave me the alternative view but it
fueled and by the time I was done at
Harvard I knew I wanted to study marxian
economics I looked around and I
discovered something which was true then
and true now which is there are very
very very few Market IST s allowed to be
economics professors or anything like
that in the United States very few
then I had come to know two of them
through my growing up in the New York
area I knew Paul Sweezy and I knew Harry
magdoff who together ran the monthly
Review
magazine and they told me okay they had
become sort of mentors by then because I
was showing a lot of interest and they
connected me with Paul Baran who taught
at Stanford and so I went out to
Stanford because Paul Baran at the end
of World War II before the
mccarthyite Juggernaut got
going had
befriended the way the world Works he
had befriended a conservative American
Economist named Henry wallet
a monitor monetary Inc and they had
become friends wallik had gotten a job
at
Stanford and he prevailed on the other
people there to hire this very bright
young man Paul Baran and so he became
and he got tenure before they kind of
figured out who he was so I went and
studied with
him uh partly writing on the
American um elitism because if you go to
Harvard and you do well but remember I
always had to do well yeah was my
parents' rule immigrant mentality
absolutely
um so I had done real well so Stanford
was happy to get me let me actually say
something really quickly just a brief
quip that's the real immigrant mentality
it's not what we've been hearing on the
news of course of course immigrants are
terribly afraid of not doing well they
have to kind of prove that they're all
of that I was the first child of my
immigrant parents so I had to prove all
of that it was awful um does things to
you
psychologically very heavy price to pay
in any case I went to Stanford they were
eager to have me they gave me money I
had no money I all the way through I had
to get
money um and then Baran had the bad
taste of
dying uh two-thirds of the way through
the first year I worked very closely
with him I worked on the gal of uh
Monopoly Capital the book that he and
swezy produced that was an important
book in the 1960s and70s
and then when he died I went to Yale it
was like a joke so I'm a I'm a poster
boy for fancy education but I got no
Marxism anyway that was all done either
on my own or with that tutor or with
other young students students like
myself who were interested we would work
together but we got no help and we got
lots of
opposition give you just one example and
it shows you how the world has changed I
wrote a dissertation on British
colonialism in East
Africa and when I handed it in it said
that that you
British in East Africa and my professors
said we we will not accept
this oh I said what did I do wrong oh
nothing the thesis is wonderful but you
can't have that title I I looked at them
why not it's not a value-free term
colonialism so if you look up my
dissertation at the in Yale Library it
says economic aspects of British foreign
policy that that they could have
colonialism they could and the word
capitalism
was banished you did not hear in the
curricula of any of those schools
discussion of capital it was the taboo
was so total it wasn't just that you
didn't do any marks or marxists just
think of the names that he dropped Rosa
Luxenberg Carl leap KES and these are
names I discovered them all I read all
of that but nobody ever gave me a book
or an article by these people but you
couldn't say capitalism because that was
associated with the critics of
capitalism and so the way you expunge it
is you just don't talk it's like not
there economic system you can say that
free market you can say that capitalism
can't say that now you can but you
couldn't
P anyway so that that I come to the mark
my father
I should say for
transparency was close to people in what
came later to be called the Frankford
school so the first time I went back to
Europe I connected with people like Max
horkheimer I mean you'll know these
people
but you know in
Europe in most of my lifetime if you
were interested in Marxism you were
interested in
European cuz that's where was and you
had to kind of go and read it and bring
it here now there's a developing
American Marxist which a wonderful
everybody knew it would happen but it's
taken a while the early the Early
Marxism came with the immigrants and
showed that in the whole way that it was
developed well since Richard's talking
about his experience in school uh I I
can fill you in uh my experience uh with
Marxism peaked in high school
uh at the University of Chicago Lab
School uh we had a teach our social
science teacher Curtis edit had uh a big
sign over the school school room uh wall
give them all with the Rosenberg Scot uh
and later I found out he meant the Jews
not the Communists but uh uh most of our
discussion was about communism and uh he
very quickly uh there developed a
three-way argument uh he would uh say
something right-wing uh I would uh say
another position uh uh he would call me
a communist but we had a stalinist in
the class Danny Lando and Danny Lando
would call me a fascist uh and so uh
complicated you had me attacked by both
uh uh uh both times I recruited what
became many of the leaders of the
trotskyists in that class it was the
only time in my life I was the voice of
reason in the Middle with everybody else
seeming to be in an extremist uh and
when my father was in one of the things
my father did in jail was I collect the
large filing cabinet on 3x5 cards of
everything that lenon and Trotsky said
about uh labor tactics and uh socialism
and I remembered it all uh by uh a few
months into the class I had uh two of my
students would carry in uh The Works of
lenon put them on the their desk uh the
I would make some point to the the
teacher he'd say where did and say that
and I would say from memory volume such
and such page such and such and uh my
students would pull it out and so you
know I could have
uh a basis for everything I I was
empirical basis for all of this uh and
that uh one of my classmates was Gavin
mcfadin who became one of the leading uh
uh investigative journalists uh uh we
had a film company Chicago films that
made the BBC films and New York City and
I'd bought a house on SEC big house on
Second Street uh and uh we had to set up
like this and in front of a library and
in back of everybody little did anybody
notice we had the works of Marx vilhelm
Reich you know other people and the
camera would always have the same people
you know these are the works in the
background it was wonderful well then I
came to New York and I didn't uh I went
through um through the University of
Chicago uh not thinking any thought of
Economics at all uh my degree was in uh
German history in philology because I i'
planed to be an Orchestra conductor a
musician uh and I had all of my uh
teachers the lectures were all in German
I had to translate The Works of Hinrich
Shanker so I came to New York uh met
teren decided to go into Banking and uh
uh because my specialty was a balance I
was lucky enough I lucked out to end up
Chase Manhattan as their uh balance of
payments Economist and there are only a
few Financial economists on Mark on Wall
Street we're all marxists and we
realized that uh the reason we were all
in the positions we were in because we
knew the whole system was about
exploitation and if you go to business
school and you're taught that there is
no such thing as exploitation that
everybody gets what they earn they just
don't get uh what the economy is about
and they they make wrong forecasts uh so
the that was uh we Rose very highly none
of us ever mentioned uh
uh the Marxism or anything socialist
needless to say uh for our respective uh
employers but uh we would all meet um at
a coffee shop once uh uh seur noodle uh
in Manhattan uh uh once a month and we
describe it and I remember I think I've
mentioned this before on one occasion uh
we were discussing uh volume three of of
uh Capital where Marx is talking about
the exponential growth of debt and how
uh the job of industrial capitalism was
to industrialize finance and we laughed
and we thought what if uh you know
anybody would would hear that this is
this is how we're putting this our
analysis together and uh not a word of
it uh anywhere uh then not only that let
me add two things
one often you were
praised I bet you this happened to
Michael repeatedly his Superior and
whoever sits above him in the hierarchy
praised a report he wrote or an analysis
he gave having no clue that it was an
application of an argument coming out of
volume three of capital where Marx talks
about finance and Merchants and you know
all of that that people have no idea
about because they never looked at it
that happened to me I would my mentor
there at Harvard he would help me and I
would write papers about something and
these were to be honest crude
applications of Marxism by a young
person just learning it I would get A's
and Fritz and I would laugh all the time
that the professor just gave an a to the
Marxism he neither knows nor respects
because he's so caught up in the taboo
of the time and historians will look
back on that whole period of American
History which isn't over yet and make
fun of it and find it difficult to
believe that an otherwise Advanced
culture could be so backward when it
comes to this and that in the hysteria
of the Cold War One couldn't read or
think about or use words I mean what a
horrific kind of
self-censorship not even to go through
all the people people that were hurt by
it but we got rewarded for our Marxism
because the people rewarding us didn't
know that's what it
was the problem that we both faced I
guess when each of us began teaching was
how do we work the uh these ideas into
the curriculum um I uh was offered a
professorship at the new school uh for
social research in New York and uh that
turned out to be they said they were
socialist well that turned out to be a
mistake because a department head was
Bob H Broner uh and I was brought into
uh the department by uh one of the
economists who had World Bank contracts
and I'd been invited to give a lecture
on copper pricing and I was one of the
probably leading uh copper export uh
Specialists on Wall Street because for
uh Chase my job was forecasting the
balance of payments of Chile and uh I
had to understand copper prices because
that was a balance of payments and one
of uh Chase's uh
uh customer this was Anaconda and uh
kenicott used uh uh City Bank and so uh
I was able to explain the balance of
payments uh uh clearly and so they
thought okay he's a Wall Street person
well to H Broner I was a Wall Street
Thug he knew nothing at all of my uh uh
my background and
uh by 1971 and two I was teaching a
course in national income accounting I
used
uh theories of surplus value as uh my
textbook the students bought out the
entire uh what was remaining of uh uh
the translation and I was trying to say
you know what is is what really is gross
national product well do the landlords
produce anything do does the banker
produce anything does the monopolis
produce anything they're separated uh
they're not part of the production
system so they don't produce value what
they have is economic rent and that's a
transfer payment let's take the uh the
uh GDP and let's take away what is
really not production at all because of
it national income and production and
these people don't produce anything
you're going to have a much smaller uh
GDP well H Broner had just uh hired
somebody who he thought was uh they
actually decided let's make the new
school a Marxist school and so he h he
hired somebody uh from Yale who was a a
real Hardline stalinist who uh got got
together uh I'm block he wrote on uh
imperialism I'm blocking out the name
now uh he he got a lot of St he he
taught Marxism and would have the
students take LSD before the Marxism
course he said that one person we have
to get rid of Michael Hudson and that's
because I was talking about Volume 2 and
three and he said it's all about
capitalist exploiting workers what is
all this stuff what all this is not what
capitalism is all about uh so uh it
wasn't Steven Heimer yes it was Steve
Heimer yes that was his name just give
you an idea Steven Heimer was a member
of my dissertation committee at
Yale oh tell us about
it he was Canadian uh come from
Montreal um was a very good student went
to MIT got his PhD at
MIT there he became very close friends
with a guy named Steven Resnik who was
also a graduate student and Steven
Resnik and I have done a lot of work
together um most of the books I've
published were together with Steve
Resnik Heimer was the only person at
Yale that could have helped me do my
dissertation because he was as he said
to you a Marxist of some sort but I know
him very I knew got to know him very
well because he we worked of my
committee he didn't know much about
Marxism whatever he knew was very
shallow uh he was very good on Africa
very good on colonialism he did a lot of
stuff there and he was the
only radical who said or dared to say
anything at at Yale which is why they
threw him out as they did
Resnick um as they did me
basically um
but he I mean he may have been a
stalinist but it would have been by
inadvertence I don't think he knew much
about those things he took a
position uh they didn't have people
there they didn't have I mean I teach at
the new school now too now and the only
place I've ever been where I could teach
the Marxism as such was the University
of Massachusetts because of what
happened there odd
Arrangement they hired me to do
that which was enormously lucky for me
because it what it meant was that the
tutorial I had been in as a student
could now continue in the way a normal
professorship might that is you build on
something as a student and then you
develop it later on as a professor as a
researcher I was able to do that with
the Marxism because my my paid job was
to teach it and for example the students
wanted to learn everything so we began a
curriculum with volume one of capital
where a lot of basic stuff is done but
then the students requested and I was
overjoyed I taught every other semester
volume two volume three so they could
see the full range of what Marx had done
not to be orthodox but to not to
reinvent Wheels all the time you know
here it is there's a basis now go
develop it there are problems things
aren't well well worked out
contradictions as in all scientific work
let's go but it has been stunted in this
country because you cut it off the
taboos meant it could not go except in a
few of us who locked out you you really
are talking to two of a small group of
people we're not the only ones but we
were lucky both in the
education and in the jobs we got that we
could
continue to use that apparatus and to
develop it yeah uh since we're talking
about the new school uh H Broner said
that he wanted to make it Marxist uh but
he also gave a big lecture saying the
most worthless discussion in economics
was a distinction between productive and
unproductive labor and of course that
that's was what I was emphasizing uh and
uh uh he just doesn't know he just
didn't know he said you he he had no
idea that I was a Marxist despite the
fact that I used there is of FL value he
thought of me as oh he worked for Chase
Manhattan uh and at that time the my uh
I was being sent around the country by
the Catholic Church uh who was uh
following uh my ideas and uh was
popularizing them and uh I actually
wrote part of the papal inyc
on uh popular and progress on birth
control because they uh they i i i on an
airplane I had met someone from the
National Catholic welfare conference and
I said if you don't cut the if you don't
cut the population down to the uh food
supply you have to increase the food
supply to the population and that
requires Land Reform and uh if you're
going to uh take an uh reducing
population then you have to come out for
land reform I I actually converted uh
many of Bishops and archbishops and the
man who became the foreign the Cardinal
who became the foreign Secretary of the
uh Vatican and they sent me around uh
promoting uh The Liberation theology uh
and
uh Pope uh uh Paul v 6 uh approved what
I was doing and the uh the next uh the
good Pope was going to establish an
Academy of geoeconomics in uh Tain
University that I was to head uh
to create an alternative to the World
Bank based on uh countries producing
their own food and land reform this is
stuff you right before well for H
Browner said You know here we have a
Catholic Wall Street guy we have to
replace him with a Marxist uh and so uh
but a Marxist who didn't talk about uh
the difference between productive and
unproductive labor so uh he replaced me
with two people with Anor Shake who then
spent his whole
writing about the distinction between
productive and
unproductive labor and uh the person who
uh oh dear the uh the son of a business
school analyst who whose name i g I gave
a lecture before for the the herie and
I'm blocking out his name too uh and and
they uh the school gradually after Hal
Broner died the school did become more
open and Marxist so can they can even
expect
you know take someone like uh Richard
and he just said that he and I you know
are not the typical marxists and that's
the whole point uh well what happened to
the rest of Marxism where did it all go
why are we here almost this out of place
in what calls itself Marxism as we were
as marxists and where the whole world
was capitalism that's the St that's the
point I think that uh hope comes out of
all this in interview and it's not only
here in China I was U uh invited to the
first world Marxist conference as one of
the lead speakers they had posters with
my name all over uh Beijing and I talked
about volume three of capital it was not
received night you could see that was
not their idea uh they appointed me uh
as a professor at the school of marxist
studies uh along with uh Sasha uh
Alexander bualan who explained to me
that Marxism was the Chinese word for
politics ah I get it I get it now yeah
Marxism most Chinese characteristic um
and uh the SEC they didn't invite me to
give the lead lecture for the uh Second
World Marxism conference they invited
David Harvey uh from here in New York a
British Marxist Harvey said you've got
to look at volume three of capital just
like you know Michael said uh he would
his books have sold tremendously
throughout China uh that
uh that was not uh received well at all
because China as you know now has run
into this huge uh real estate crisis of
real estate financing and uh if they
would have read volumes two and three
they would have been able to avoid all
of that they're trying to uh uh if they
would have uh taxed all the land instead
of had having local cities uh raise
money by turning o selling the land to
real estate developers and uh then
letting uh private Banks bid up real
estate prices and create a bubble uh
they would have known that that's what
Mark said the task of industrial
capitalism is to get rid of all of this
and
uh you can see that I had the same
problem in in Russia they uh the Soviet
Union had no idea of economic rent
because they didn't charge rent and they
didn't really understand Finance because
they didn't charge interest they said
we're going to get rid of rent and
interest just like Marxism said but they
they didn't
understand that the West didn't get rid
of rent and interest and had certain
plans of what they wanted to do with the
post-soviet economy that and uh the uh
the the Russians didn't see what was
coming uh because and we were trying to
bring capitalism to Marxism to Russia
and it didn't work let me offer an
explanation of why all this
happened
um Marxism is with Marx right let's
remember Marx lives the 19th century
he's born toward the beginning and he
dies toward the end so he's in an early
phase of capitalism trying to understand
its emergence let's call it out of
feudalism he's inspired by the French
Revolution he's inspired by the American
Revolution he says so and there's not
there's not a big interpretive move of
mine and he makes a critique of
capitalism it's a very profound critique
it basically goes like this those who
brought capitalism out of
feudalism promised that it would come
with Liberty equality fraternity and
democracy as its gift to the world and
that's why we should be Pro capitalist
because look what it's bringing those
were the slogans of the French
Revolution democracy the American
so he's living 50 years after 70 years
afterwards and Marx looks around Germany
where Western Germany where he lives and
as a young
person and he basically notices that
whatever capitalism brought Liberty
equality fraternity and democracy aren't
among them cuz it's not it's very
unequal there's no Liberty people have
the poverty is all you know Marx's
living at the time described in
dickens's novels remember Oliver Twist
and Copperfield and Tale of Two Cities
and all of that and so he says what what
happened he's distraught because he
shared all of those slogans he loved
equality fraternity democracy he loved
all of that what happened sort of like I
know this is sacrilege sort of like
Hillary Clinton after she loses loses
the election writes a book what happened
you know because it wasn't supposed to
and Marx's
conclusion is that capitalism is its own
obstacle it's cap capitalism instead of
bringing all those things blocks all
those things don't look outside don't
ask it's not a mystery let me show you
why capitalism given what how it works
is an obstacle to Liberty equality for
eternity and
democracy this is very very powerful
this critique and the effort to shut it
down to close it off fails it spreads
like wildfire in the second half of the
19th
century it it spawns a political party
in Germany the Socialist Party uh with
far which includes Marx's work as its
basic literature inclusive Marx his
family as among its leaders and so forth
and it leads people to draw a very
interesting
conclusion okay huge numbers of people
say capitalism is the
problem and going Beyond capitalism will
be necessary to realize Liberty equality
fraternity and
democracy how do we do it
and again long story short the answer is
we use
suffrage we are going to use the fact
that the mass of people are
workers and we can reach them and we can
make this
argument and we can here comes the key
Point seize the
state as The crucial
institutional place to get
with which then to go beyond
capitalism the state takes on an
incredible
importance okay the only disagreement
again long story short is whether you
capture the state democratically with
elections evolutionary
Socialism or whether you seize it with a
revolutionary explosion
revolutionary
so the um the Paris commune of
1871 and the Russian Revolution of 19
are
revolutionary and the gains of the
Socialist parties in Germany and Austria
are the evolutionary
and they're quite they're quite
effective both of
them all right now we have the
explanation I think
what
happens is what has often happened in
history the means get confused with the
ends the state
becomes the thing get the state use the
state capture the state use the state
then everything is focused on the state
I want to remind you Marx never writes
about the I mean tangentially but
there's no study of this the state
doesn't Loom importance he comes before
that the state becomes important at the
end of the 19th and into the 20th
century and then this focus on the
state merges together with problems in
capitalism that can only be
resolved by an Ever larger more
intrusive State
apparatus and what begins to happen is a
bizarre coming together of The Advocates
of State intervention to keep capitalism
going with The Advocates of state to go
beyond capitalism and the two things get
terribly confused and
interwoven my teacher Paul Sweezy is the
coming together of all of those and
that's by the way why neoclassical
economists have a hard time often con
understanding why KES isn't Marx and
Marx isn't Kan they get them all mumbled
together because of this shared focus on
the
state okay and then we have the
successful Revolution in Russia and the
successful revolution in China
successful
how the Communist Party seizes the state
it does that it does it pretty
successfully it does it against the
opposition of the private capitalist
Universe in Russia remember they they
they lose the the World War I but they
then win the Revolution and they win the
Civil War uh and they e expel the
Invaders France Britain United States
and Japan invade Russia After the
Revolution they defeat
them and they establish what they
establish a
system in which the government has
largely replaced the private not in
agriculture and that's a whole another
story but in
Industry the government owns and
operates the Enterprise the government
declares you're the board of directors
you do that kind of work and you're the
employees China I mean again a very long
story short this works nicely for Russia
for 70 years they really do well they
grow fast if you think of where Russia
was at the time of the revolution in
1917 it was the most backward corner of
Europe and within 50 years despite two
world wars a revolution and a civil war
they are the Challenger of the United
States that's an amazing achievement
before you dismiss everything they did
that is an amazing achievement there
were horrible things that happened along
the way that's part of the
balance I have no no problem with that
but they achieved a lot of things then
now we have China also a successful
Revolution
1949 what is
China China looks at the United States
in England and says you've held on to a
a private capitalism you've kept the
government
limited Soviet Union you gave the
government basically
everything we're not happy with the
outcome oh either of these so we're
going to build a hybrid we're going to
have half the economy private capitalism
and the other half what Lenin in
1922 referred to what they had achieved
in Russia as state capitalism why would
he do that the government was in the
hands of the Communist party there were
no other parties that were a threat at
that by by that time they had EXP
spelled The Invader they'd won the Civil
War they basically had everything why
would he call it I believe the answer is
that he was and now you'll see how
Michael and I are similar I think Lennon
was a good Marxist he
understood that you haven't made a
revolution you haven't gone beyond
capitalism when you make a move from the
private to the state because it is State
capitalism it's not a new you can call
it whatever you want you call it
socialism but it isn't it not Marx was
all about the volume one of capital
what's the
relationship here who produces who gets
there's a surplus who gets it what do
they do those who get it with it they
distribute it to other people who do not
produce value they do other things
they're financiers they're landlords
they do all kinds of other things
the revolution remains to happen Marxist
CR criticism and where I think Marxism
is going now is to understand it's that
that has to be changed we're not you
haven't done what has to be done just
like Marx said you haven't made Liberty
equality fraternity by having
capitalism now the marxists have to face
the fact that they have to say you
haven't achieved those things by going
from private to State capitalism the
whole way hybrid way no it you haven't
dealt with here we go the organization
of production you haven't done that and
until you do that the
relevant it's not relevant to talk about
socialism you haven't got there yet
socialism is still that which has to be
fought for and I do it that as an
Exemplar by trying to talk about what it
really might mean to have an economy in
which
Enterprises those that produce goods and
services are organized in a democratic
way one person one vote no employer
employee dichotomy that has to go the
workers together will decide what is to
happen you bring it into the Enterprise
unless you're prepared to transform the
organization of production what you're
doing does not
yet absorb and apply what Marx taught us
last
point in the history of slavery there
were plenty of examples I think we did
this where the slave Enterprise was
Private or the slave Enterprise was the
state and there was Private feudalism
and state feudalism nobody says it isn't
slavery because the state was active and
nobody says it wasn't feudalism because
there was a state apparatus that had
surfs why in the hell did we waste a
century of thinking that if you have the
state active in capitalism you no longer
have capitalism no you have state
capitalism alongside the private just
like you had that before Po and
therefore there's another reason to be
open to the idea that what Marxism is
going to be doing is trying very hard to
think through to advocate for to
militate in the direction of a
transformation of the
workplace as some not as the only thing
to do but as something that wasn't done
that is the mil missing element there
are still import important macro
questions and all of that I'm not
arguing do this not that I'm saying not
attending to the radical transformation
of the
workplace is the mistake that the
Socialist movement of the last 100 years
has
made I think here's how that problem
came into being really there there are
two uh the problem is how do we teach
students about Marxism and there are two
approaches uh the you usual one is to
say you begin with Marx and you go
forward and what it's become and you
begin with Soviet Union and you the
state uh where that have called
themselves Marxism that's you begin and
uh what Richard and I uh do we're
looking at Marx is the culmination of a
whole long discussion uh about that
includes value price rent and all of
this that uh made capitalism
revolutionary uh what verb are we going
to use for capitalism Richard said
emerged but but then he explained that
capitalism didn't really emerge from
feudalism it wanted to wipe it out it
wanted to free Europe and Marxist from
the legacy of feudalism it wanted to get
rid of the landlord class and that
required political reform you get rid of
the uh Power of the House of Lords uh in
England to over uh overrule the House of
Commons uh you want to get uh rid of uh
banking all of this did require a state
uh and in in fact uh while these
Dynamics are occurring there was within
capitalism itself support of the state
the whole purpose of getting rid of rent
and interest and uh monopolies was to
lower the cost of production and again
and again Mark says uh the task of
industrial capitalism is to get rid of
the false costs faux freay uh of of
production to minimize costs that's how
they compete how do you minimize cost uh
well you you get uh uh one way is not
only to get rid of the landlords uh and
bankers and monopolist but uh you need
uh increasing government spending to uh
to take over uh certain costs from uh so
that the employers don't have to pay if
the state pays for uh roads and Parks if
it pays for public health if it pays for
Education if it pays for all of the
infrastructure then employers uh in one
country that has these strong uh State
expenditures will not have to uh pay uh
workers enough to afford high prices for
food high prices for Education they can
afford to pay lower country prices than
countries that haven't developed a uh so
we'll call it a Social Democratic state
or a socialist state so and it was the
American school and Marx pointed this
out it's an the American that said uh
the the role of the state is uh there is
to lower the price the cost of
production and to subsidize industrial
capitalism and I think we've talked
before that the first uh professor of
Economics at uh the first business
school in America Simon Patton said
public uh uh investment uh in uh canals
and railroads and Roads uh is a fourth
factor of production a job isn't to make
a profit isn't to make a economic gain
it's to lower the cost of living and
lower the cost of production to make the
economy more productive that's what
America did and it's also pretty much uh
what happened in Germany uh and in
Marx's time uh he was saying well uh in
we've got to industrialize the financial
system so it's not predatory that's what
he says again and again in uh not only
in volume three of capital but in the
Communist Manifesto and his other thing
how do you uh and that requires in a way
the state to prevent uh rent seeking and
in Germany uh you had a a a completely
different kind of banking than you had
in uh the Anglo-Saxon Dutch Country the
banking there was uh actually to promote
industry and you had sort of a a union
between Bankers the state and heavy
industry largely for the military uh and
uh so you had German industrial banking
that wanted uh if a a Industrial company
is still maker or other country would
make a profit the uh indust the German
banks said don't pay it out in dividends
and they never thought of using the
money for stock purchase buyback
agreements uh use it to expand your
industry and expand your industry
whereas the Anglo Saxon uh American
banking said you know as soon as you
make a profit pay it out is dividends uh
to raise the price of the stock in in uh
in Western Europe and America uh banking
with short term just uh Take the Money
and Run uh same thing with stock Brokers
uh in England they they'd underwrite a
company and then walk away and hit make
another thing in Germany it was all long
term and so Marx s saw that well uh
socialism is going to emerge out of
capitalism not uh by getting rid of it
like capitalism had to get rid of
feudalism but actually develop it and
Mark I think in a number of occasions
saw banks are going to be sort of uh the
Central right now is banks are the
allocators of credit uh decide who gets
uh uh the funding and fi to finance to
expand that's what socialism is going to
do and so socialism will sort of emerge
out of this mentality uh well uh he that
was occurring in Germany it didn't occur
in the Anglo Saxon country uh and Mark
also just footnote that's also why Lenin
at the end of the 19s is beginning of
the 20th century sees what we would
nowadays call
financialization happening and he says
see we're get that's why it's the last
or the highest stage of capitalism
because the concentration of
Finance he makes that remark we'll just
have to take over these Banks and then
it'll be us and modern socialis Meto in
France two or three decades ago that's
what he did he seized the banks in
France with the plan which he couldn't
do but he had the plan was with this we
can allocate the credit and we can
replace Germany as the core of Europe
they didn't let him do it but that was
the idea yep well Mark Marx thought that
capitalism was uh going to he was an
optimist he thought that uh the
materialist approach of History he
thought well classes are going to work
in their self-interest he didn't see the
counterrevolution that occurred after he
died uh the counter Revolution that got
rid of rent theory that somehow used
neoclassical economics yeah yeah and it
was really should be called
postclassical anti-classical economics
yes uh velin coined the term
neoclassical meaning this is now the new
economics and he shouldn't have called
it neoclassical people think it's
something new like neoclassical and it's
against everything that classical
economics is all about it's U bgea
economics it's the economics of the
roner saying there no such thing as born
if I teach these courses in the history
of thought in the
1870s Britain France and England at the
same time jevans in England manger in
Germany and valra in French speaking
they develop what we now call
neoclassical economics in direct
opposition to the explosion of Marxism
so that one of their students burm B in
Germany writes he the the classical book
at the turn of the
century uh abos the marxis system the
how would you translate that uh the end
of the Marxist system that's when he
discovers that there's something
different between values and prices and
gets terribly excited by this discovery
let me let me pose this question for
Rick and it's been great to have this
this Preamble and our intention for
today was to discuss the evolution of
Marx in the west and your analysis of
marks and his the importance of
understanding Marx to evaluate today's
economy so what I want to start with and
then Michael and I will continue is I
don't want to presuppose that our
listeners know too much about marks or
anything at all what do you think are
the crucial dimensions of his theory
that we need to understand to have this
discussion well on the simplest
level
every economic
system of which we have any kind of
record
indicates that there were people who
lived in it who loved it and celebrated
it and there were also people in it who
didn't and who were
critical and either you Foster and
allow that contradiction to play
out let those who love it talk about
that why do you and what do you think is
happening and let those who have a
critical perspective do the
same the United
States more than almost any other
country I
know particularly develop
industrial
countries is now coming off 75 years of
self enforced
ignorance silencing the
critical uh views from Marx allowing
others but not the marxian critique that
is a
taboo it is a legacy of the Cold War as
it was a part of the Cold War to expunge
all of this uh it is still true that one
of the key things that the two kinds of
Economics professors that's my
profession the the the neoclassical and
the can in they usually call them
themselves one of the few things they
can agree on is to completely exclude
the marxists from the conversation the
so-called great debate in economics is
between those who want to bit more state
intervention and those who want a bit
less a discussion that I found stale
when I encountered it as a student and
it is stal yet but it keeps going and it
is the substitute for what should be the
debate which is Pro and Contra
capitalism which is the issue that
Marxism puts on the ground number
two Marxism premise is that the human
race can do better than capitalism and I
would I would provoke your
audience isn't it one of the great
things we celebrate about the human
species that we
inquire about how we can do better don't
we say that's a
foundational component of the technology
we're so proud of of the forms of
government we're proud of we once had
monarchy we thought we could do better
we think we
have where is it that in
capitalism it should be written that
that's it we can't do better it's the
best and anybody who says otherwise shut
up that's the behavior of a person or of
a movement or of a society that is
afraid that's what this is It's fear
it's not it's not a reasonable argument
and the people who make it
half know that it isn't that's part of
why it has to be shut down number
three Marx is a product of
capitalism Marxism is capitalism's
Shadow you're not going to get rid of it
no no it's there without capitalism
there wouldn't have been a Marx he is a
it's the hegelian moment of opposition
it's the
opposite Smith and Ricardo celebrate
capitalism Marx learns from them but
says I don't think it's so great I think
we can do better now rational Community
would investigate this I can assure you
that Michael and I will attest in any
way you want to the value of doing that
that Marx has a lot to teach us his
whole good history in banking has been
as mine has in my areas been the
application of what we learned my
education forly was without any Marxism
I had to substitute and you know enhance
it on my
own uh and Michael in his way had to
also partly through the luck of his
family and his
history it ought to be part of the
curriculum and just as capitalism
produced marks I think the problems of
capitalism now are producing as they
have before a Renaissance of interest in
Marxism The Last 5 Years have seen and I
see this every day in my life a level of
resurging interest that is stunning it's
just it's everywhere it's in this
conversation and it's everywhere else
and I don't think that's about to be
stopped I think it's going to take new
forms cuz we have new conditions I think
places like Russia and China will
produce their own ways of developing it
it's not taboo there certain
interpretations have a hard time but you
know their whole Chinese universities
have all big Departments of marxist
studies and Marxist philosophy and all
of that so my guess
is the ignorance in this country will
shape a
bizarre hesitant Herky jour
turkey engagement with it but I don't
think it'll be held back here either
it's too late for that I also think and
Michael and I may not agree on this but
I also think that the American Empire is
in a decline I don't see that reversing
itself any I think we've been talking
about that for the last month yeah and
that American capitalism is dependent on
that Empire which means if the Empire is
going down that's not good news for the
for this system as adjusted to the
Empire it was able to wield the same 75
years of taboo on Marxism have been the
75 years of the rise the peak and now
the decline of of the Empire I don't
think those things are
unrelated and I think you're going to
see an
explosion of of interest in
Marxism and in offshoots of
Marxism and last Point there's a lot
more
Marxism in the United States than anyone
I think is prepared to admit and to
acknowledge last week just to give you
an
example last week was the the news that
a literary critic named Frederick
Jameson
died um I knew him I worked with him a
little bit for a while this was a
Marxist he was he was the leading
literary critic in the United States for
most of the last 30 years this is a man
I know personally who studied and read
and argued and debated with me among
others about Marxism which he was very
well uh he very well read and very well
schooled in it we had our
disagreements but this was a serious
Marxist he would have said he did say
but he would have said that everything
he tried to do in the works that he
published and he's very prolific he
published dozen books and 100
articles um was infused with his
Marxism but because of the taboo here
what you have is huge numbers of people
who who read his work and use his work
and cite his work but they need to
cleanse it or to evade or move around
dealing with its
Marxism it's like one of the great
Marxist theorists from Italy Antonio
grami okay one of the great theorists of
the of the 20th century in Marxism
and has an enormous following there's an
international grami Society they have
conferences and meetings people across
many disciplines know about gromi you
want to be able to drop his name in a
cocktail conversation and sound like you
know what you're talking about but when
I sit there and I I listen politely and
then I say yes and are you aware that he
was the head of the Italian Communist
party for many
years they look at me with the kind of
disappointment of a puppy from whom the
bone has been
removed they don't want this bad news
they want to enjoy the complexity of
what he had to say about Italian culture
which is wonderful
stuff but that's what he was and he died
because musolini the fascist killed him
in
prison that's what happened that's who
or the G notion well you know what's it
nowadays
authoritarian Hitler was authoritarian
and Stalin was Authority whatever those
words mean the notion that these are all
the same because you've attached the
same word to each of them is
childish there was one of the great
Slaughters of all time the fash
versus the stalinist the trosky they
would they didn't care they killed
everybody that I mean where does that
fit into this glib Association of
authoritarian I mean what what are you
doing and
lastly I think we're on the
cusp and I don't say this
lightly of a
recognition which when it begins to take
hold here here will spread like
wildfire that the most
authoritarian institution that this
Society has to work worry
about is the capitalist
Enterprise in every Factory office and
store a tiny group of people the board
of directors the major shareholders the
owning family the partnership make all
the decisions they decide what to
produce what what technology to use
where to locate the production and what
to do with the output and the mass of
people are drones this is the opposite
of democracy it's the most
authoritarian organization imaginable
and at some point it's going to Dawn on
people that the authoritarianism they're
worried about in North Korea is not the
one that they ought to worry about
there's a little test you give to
children for the IQ
and there's a a
picture of of of a person being attacked
by other people put aside that that's
the way they do
this and then there's a person far away
who's going to throw a stone and all the
anxiety of the person being attacked
it's for the person far away and you
show that to a child because you're
hoping to see whether the child can
recognize that that's not rational to be
concerned about the one far away you
should be concerned about the one who's
close right did that well I think we're
going to have that moment that cathartic
social moment when everyone begins to
recognize where the
authoritarianism that you don't like
where it begins where it's grounded
where you are subject to it five days of
the week for the best hours of the day
throughout your adult life that's your
problem with authoritarian Ian ISM and
if you're a Democrat with a little D
that's your problem and you haven't
faced it or understood it and Marxism is
the theory that will help you understand
how it works and what its consequences
are and that will generate the
appreciation for what is now so
blly
dismissed all right Rick it has been an
absolute pleasure to have you with us
today it's an absolute pleasure to talk
with you on Thursday well I feel a
kinship with Michael I had known before
because I learned about his history I
learned about how he got here I think
it's very very important that these
stories are
told and the reason is because there are
a lot of us and maybe if some of the
stories are told more of us
will emerge into the daylight and talk
to one another they're not too many of
us more more than most would like to
believe well Michael nobody's going to
notice that some time has passed and our
our chairs have shifted it was some some
magic on my part
but we heard Rick's thoughts on what
features of Marx's theories are
necessary to understand the evolution of
Marxism in the west and what we need to
understand about Marx to evaluate
today's economic situation but I wanted
to pose the same question to you just
because it would be nice to hear your
own take on things well Richard uh
talked about uh the great forgetting of
all this the great absence of it uh I
think the best way to look at this is
what's happening in the bricks countries
right now uh they're trying to create an
alternative uh to what Western Europe
and America has done to them they're
trying to uh really design a new Society
very much in the way that the classical
economists were trying to uh free their
society from feudalism from landlords
and uh finance and uh monopolis yeah you
can see what the bricks are already
talking about they want to get rid of
the fact that uh of colonialism they
want to get rid of the fact that foreign
countries have come in and taken control
of their land for the land rent and
natural resources for the for the
natural resource rent the oil rent the
mineral rent uh the uh
deforestation uh and they want to deal
with uh the debt problem that there are
all of the fruits of their growth have
to be paid to the Western creditors in
the form of interest and uh they have to
subject themselves to the international
monetary fund and the World Bank
uh saying you know we're going to
withdraw credit from you we're going to
end up bankrupting your uh balance of
payments and therefore your exchange
rates if you don't follow the neoliberal
uh laws that we want if you try to tax
um foreign uh uh owners of your natural
resources if you want to find the oil
companies for when they're creating uh
pollution then that's against the
international uh you know investment
laws and you have to compensate them uh
for any of the fines so that you have to
Bear all of the costs of the damage that
they do to uh your economy these are the
uh problems that they're faced with and
uh in a way they're the the same
problems that Western Europe had uh and
the irony is that these problems are
caused by the progressive forces of
capitalism getting rid of rent and
finance and Monopoly but as they col
colonized they they created these very
same problems the last thing that
England and France and Germany and
America wanted was for other countries
to develop the way they did for other
countries to uh free themselves from uh
from uh this the rtier income well I
haven't seen any discussion at all uh
among the bricks uh of Marxism or
classical economics what they're doing
today is trying to reinvent the wheel
but they're trying to reinvent the wheel
without realizing that it was already
invented Ed 2 200 years ago in the
classical economics uh and so when
Richard talks about what their they're
going to uh help themselves reinvent it
by understanding marks
U what he means is not is Marx is
including all of the ideas of Adam Smith
and John Stewart Mill and the other
Ricardo and the classical economists the
whole analytic system that they have for
what kind of income is productive and
necessary and what kind of income is
predatory exploitative uh and we don't
need there's no discussion at all in the
bricks so far of uh for instance taxing
away land rent uh nationalizing the land
and yet that was the first uh item of
the Communist Manifesto uh that
discussed in a way you could say that
the Communist Manifesto could be uh
taken as uh the lead of point is what
the bricks are going to be doing when
they're uh meeting later in October in
uh Kazakhstan uh and yet I haven't seen
any discussion and I'm in contact with
uh a lot with a lot of uh people who
play a role in uh China Russia and other
bricks countries uh and uh uh Richard
and I are both on many uh different uh
uh International
uh discussion groups saying this but we
have no idea uh about the extent to
which our ideas are picked up because in
a way we're being
uh dismissed as part of the same kind of
Communism that ended up in uh in in
stalinism uh and they're not looking at
China really as being uh Marxist uh in
this and the Chinese are not making any
attempt
to uh create a uh a dealing with uh land
rent natural resource rent or Finance uh
because that hasn't been part of their
version of socialism with Chinese
characteristics and in fact in uh
1979 uh the US Department of Education
uh had me as a uh uh as a consultant and
they brought me to a meeting with the
World Bank and I will disc discussing my
discussions with the Chinese
representative at the World Bank and he
said you know what you're saying is
wonderful we've got to uh bring you to
Shanghai to uh discuss there's a Futures
Institute there some just like you'd
like would you like to go there and I
said yes and you know the good thing is
uh that I'm a Marxist too and his face
blamed he said oh dear the uh I I'd urge
you not to go if you go you may not come
out alive he said the one thing they
don't want is any marxists because for
them Marxism was uh what happened in
Russia it's bureaucratic collectivism
it's uh the state that in uh doesn't let
uh any New Economic Policy Lenin called
it any private Enterprise being uh
Innovative uh or sensing what the market
needs or uh new uh Technologies of
uh electric uh electricity of the other
so he said best if you don't go and uh I
realized that
that I I was not welcomed at uh uh ping
University's School of Internet of
Marxism and didn't didn't stay there
after two years uh because I realized
that their idea of Marxism as I
mentioned was the politics and uh
General economic analysis which they
pasted as is a label on it and uh and as
Richard said they're very few other
Marxist there many people who've gone to
Marxist schools like were Richard do uh
at Amherst Massachusetts but not all of
the graduates in Marxism understood uh
Marxism uh and uh he and I are pretty
much by ourselves uh I know there are
some people who are very sympathetic to
us but I don't know anyone else who's
still alive and we're in our 80s uh who
uh have this this background and uh in
order to understand Marxism
in volume two and three you really have
to study all of classical economics
because uh the it was all part of an
organic development a very that was uh
was uh a development it wasn't uh
getting rid of anything it wasn't marks
against uh the free marketers uh it was
marks is he shared their idea of a free
market uh and a free market to Adam
Smith and the other classical economists
was a market free from economic rent you
don't have a landlord class anymore uh
because uh there there will be land rent
some locations they're worth more than
others but that uh rent will be used as
a tax base we don't have to tax Labor's
wages we don't have to take tax the
industrialists profit you know it'll we
tax away economic rent where it can't be
avoided and um where there doesn't have
to be rent uh we'll make sure that
uh natural monopolies like uh water and
sewer or educ ation or Healthcare are
not in private hands so there's not
there not going to be any private uh
monopolists well in a way China has uh
made the great uh socialist Marxist uh
advantage in keeping money is a public
utility that really is the key without
the uh we were discussing before how um
Marx expected Banks to become the
economic planners
of industrial capitalism because they
were looking for efficiency but what is
destroying industrialism in the United
States and Europe for the last 30 years
40 years has been the financial system
the banks because the banks are not uh
trying to support industry you can make
much more money by de-industrializing
the country than you can by
industrializing it you can make much
more money uh borrowing money from a
bank buying a corporation smashing it up
uh selling off parts s uh if uh you're a
hospital for you uh you immediately sell
off the land uh to a real estate company
and then you lease it back and you use
the money you get for this land youve
sold to pay a special dividend to the uh
finan Financial uh managers who take it
over and when uh Richard talked about uh
the industrialists today not playing a
productive role uh the heads of the
companies are not really the CEO uh it's
the chief Chief Financial Officer so the
uh industrial capitalism itself has been
taken over by the financial system that
lives in the short term that was
exploitative and uh was is uh has ended
up deindustrializing the United States
and Europe well this is obviously not uh
uh the way that uh the bricks countries
want want to know but but uh the
question is to what extent are they
going to let Western Banks men as
opposed to realizing that if you can
control the banks you really can control
the allocation now Marx was an optim
optimist about capitalism more than
anyone else at the time uh he was saying
how uh the banks will develop capitalism
will evolve into socialism and banks
will play a leading role in this well
today banks are playing the leading role
in as I said in deal industrializing as
preventing the evolution into socialism
and really is the fight between the
United States and the dollar standard
against the bricks countries and one of
the key things that they're talking
about is dollariz they realiz that
dollariz means getting rid of the whole
Legacy of foreign dollar debt that their
countries have been loaded down with by
being forced by their former Colonial
Powers acting through the the new
colonial power the World Bank and the
IMF to uh uh follow uh essentially a pre
predatory Monopoly rent seeking uh
Enterprises owned by foreigners that
take the uh rent and the whatever
profits there are from the monopolies
that are privatized uh and send it to uh
the United States England uh or the
European foreign investors there now
Richard and I have discussed how this
process evolved in the west but uh but I
don't see a similar discussion taking
place in all of the discussions about uh
uh where are the bricks going to go and
how are they going to uh develop this
they they realize that what we're seeing
today is a split in civilization in the
same way that you could say industrial
capitalism was a split in Civilization
it was a split from capitalis from
feudalism into the post feudal Epoch you
free itself from all of this uh us
overhead well how are the bricks
countries going to free themselves from
colonialism it's the same economic
analysis value uh price and rent thir
with that price being the excess of uh
overvalue with the excess of price
overvalue the exploit the free lunch
being uh economic rent well neoc
classical economics and uh University of
Chicago monetarism uh says just what
Milton Friedman said there is no free
lunch but Finance capitalism is all
about a free lunch that's what the
economy is all about and that's why as I
mentioned before uh we Marxist did uh
very well as on W Wall Street as
economic futurists as forecasters as
explaining what was happened because we
knew it was about a free lunch this is
not creating value it's creating rent
and uh once you realize that that
distinction you have a whole different
idea of capitalism uh and uh the laws of
motion as Mark said in volume one of
capital well what are the laws of motion
of Finance capitalism they're actually
the same uh laws of feudalism they want
to entrench a landlord class or uh
except now it's a financial uh inter
multinational corporations uh that own
the land that own the M the mineral
rights and the oil rights and the forest
rights and uh uh bought have forced the
public infrastructure that's been
privatized uh control the Pension funds
that's not a Public Funding they're all
privatized now uh they're uh they're
being told to go the way that the United
States is doing there's uh when I uh I
went three times to lecture before the
Duma in Russia in the 1984 and five uh
to try to say look you're going to have
an explosion of housing prices and
that's going and uh of predat your
oligarchs are going to uh do what
they've just done to noral Nickel you
know they're going to take uh the uh
mineral rent natural resource rent uh
instead of the state taking it uh
instead of using this rent uh income
that you can certainly sell uh nickel uh
and platinum and oil for much more than
the cost of production but instead of
using this uh rent to finance your
industrialization lower in uh living
lower the cost of living provide you can
provide uh turn over all of the
apartments you have to the current
owners it free now you own the apartment
uh then they won't have to pay rent
you'll have you'll have the lowest cost
economy in the world this is uh exactly
you know the rent should be uh a a
public utility uh and that's one way
that you'll become more competitive well
needless to say the uh uh politicians
who invited me over to address the Duma
uh found themselves de elected by uh he
said American advisors came over as to
how to steal elections just like they do
in the United States uh and uh not and
you know their idea of democracy was uh
the the financial Powers controls the
election it's really an oligarchy uh and
so I didn't have a role to play in
Russia's restructuring itself along
uh along productive lines Marxist lines
I tried to bring Marxism to Russia and I
failed uh to make a long story uh short
that's pretty ironic yeah and uh there's
there really uh you have Richard and me
but they're not enough of us to go
around to the whole world and uh we are
uh you're talking to us uh Nema is
talking to us other people talk to us
but uh
uh not the New York Times or the Wall
Street journal or NBC or CNN let me ask
you a bit about that something that I
find striking about it is the New York
Times
CNN these media
institutions they thrive on views they
want people to watch them and to read
them you and Richard are among the most
visible and enjoyed economists that
there are on YouTube I I mean I know
this this is part of my job so why do
you think it is that these institutions
aren't interested outside the tunnel
vision that they have yeah we want we
want to uh people to argue about things
that don't matter uh you want to argue
about uh abortion rights and women uh
you know that you know have plenty of
that they can talk about that do you
want to talk about pollution and uh the
environmental problem you can talk about
that uh do do you want to talk about you
know what what what do you think of
Modern Art is Mo non-objective art good
or bad you can't talk about economics
now it's true The Washington Post
actually asked me to write an oped for
them on U debt can the need for debt
cancellation and they did put it on
their site they didn't put it in a
printed Edition uh somebody over
overruled it U when I was uh writing my
uh book on uh the origins of Enterprise
and debt in Mesopotamia uh I the
uh Yale University press uh gave you
know said oh you know uh this is
wonderful you know we we want let's send
it out to reviewers the reviewers all
said yeah this is great you know uh he
has to make he has to update the
bibliography he has to use the more
recent translations of hammer rabi's law
uh and they were all set to do and forg
the forgiven their debts but then the uh
the overall board said no no we can't do
that uh this is be beyond the scope of
what we're doing and I think that's the
answer same thing at Chicago uh the head
of Pantheon uh was going to publish uh
essentially the the book that uh became
a uh killing the host uh and uh he went
to head the University of Chicago press
said look I had a you know great writer
who worked with the chairman of the
board of uh Pantheon you for many years
uh you know let's do it uh that so he
submitted the book the uh the entire
board threatened to resign if they
published my book they that's not the
kind of discussion they wanted uh the
discussion they want is you you don't uh
discuss or debate something that is uh
unchallengeable something that is
unspeakable so we're uh speaking about
the Unspeakable you should say uh and uh
what we're doing here is uh what is not
going to be found in uh the the general
discuss
even though your shows and shows that
are other people that are talking to
Richard and me are very popular uh there
have not been uh any of the scouts
literary Scouts from uh publishing
companies or uh newspapers or magazines
or other media that have any interest at
all and uh uh in discussing it were
Beyond The Pale I guess there must be
other phrases for that but uh you're not
allowed to challenge the vested
interests and they're they're willing to
talk about you can disagree about things
that don't pose any challenge to the
vested interests of Vin's phrase but
take them for granted uh and you can
talk about abortion rights but you take
for granted the whole financial and
economic system uh when uh we talk about
not taking for granted by the economic
system but saying this is this system is
not working well it's turned into a bad
destructive de-industrializing system uh
and the debts can't be paid then all of
a sudden uh you
uh you've made yourself not welcome at
the party uh
it so that you'll have things like uh I
uh George soros's group inet uh
Institute for New Economic thinking it
can't be that new uh it can be uh new in
the sense so uh we're going to exclude
everything in the past we're not going
to talk about classical economics we're
not going to talk about Marxism that's
the past we're going to talk about how
Financial fund managers can help make a
better more profitable economy and make
you wealthier by making capital gains to
uh increase uh uh your wealth and let
the Pension funds make enough money to
pay you uh while you work within the
existing system uh so uh what uh Richard
and I are saying isn't really no they
were saying we're not trying to reinvent
the wheel we're saying look the wheel's
already there yeah it's been invented uh
if you have the background and it does
take a little time to work into this
background uh but you have to realize uh
that the vocabulary of classical
economics and Marxism have been hijacked
uh and I as I said for uh Adam Smith and
the classical economists a free market
was free from economic run R and all
these ronti a charges to today's economy
a free market is free from government
taxation of economic rent from the
government doing anything to restrict
Usery to restrict uh what the financial
sector can do to restrict exploitation
uh and to make to say acknowledge that
really the most profitable section of
every economy today is crime drug
dealing crime and breaking the law
consistent L by Financial corporations
by monopolists uh by the bankers by the
credit card company by breaking the user
what used to be Usery laws by being a
Libertarian uh and a liberty for the 1%
to do whatever they want to the 99% so
uh you almost have to uh think of how to
analyze vocabulary and hardly by
surprise a lot of this analysis of uh
literary analysis of vocabulary was done
by marxists even in the case of uh a
monetary Theory uh the modern monetary
theory developed out of Marxism uh
Heyman Minsky was a Marxist and he told
me that uh uh when he went to the
University of Chicago in the 1930s uh
Maynard kriger uh was uh helped uh teach
him about Marxism Maynard had run for
vice president with Norman Thomas on the
Socialist uh party ticket in 1940 and
still going strong wrong in the 1950s
when I knew him um so uh but but Minsky
doesn't didn't talk about Marxism but he
had his children told me that uh they
were all brought up to he urged them to
read Capital to read marks and uh his
widow told me that uh uh she thought
that I was carrying through his Spirit
and the and she acknowledged that well
uh he's
uh wasn't allowed to teach the new
school uh because one of the professors
uh Minsky was the babysitter of him and
had changed his diapers uh when uh he
was young and uh the professor said I
can't have another professor here who
changed my diapers as as a child I I'm
always blocking out the name of that
person uh any rate uh the uh he was at
Bard College which is not exactly a at
the levy Institute uh which is very
Progressive in many ways but not
certainly not Marxist
and uh none of the modern monetary
theorists uh who Randy Ray all of us
have a background in Marxism uh and but
we don't uh describe it as Marxism as
such and uh Stephanie kilton became the
uh adviser to Bernie Sanders and uh the
democ a part of the democratic finance
committee uh she's kept Marxism quiet
and as it is there's such a fight
against modern monetary theory that says
that the government doesn't have to
borrow from Bond holders it can create
their own money the the effect on in
inflation is identical uh whether you uh
borrow from somebody's fortune and spend
it into the economy or whether you print
it it's all the same uh effect uh that's
what basically what monetary modern
monetary Theory says it's still work
were isolated the students that we had
at the University of Missouri at Kansas
City uh uh
do not get the prestigious positions
because the prestigious economic
journals won't publish uh any of the
their ideas because again it's beyond
the pale the economic journals will not
uh publish any article that uh suggests
that money should be viewed as a public
utility or that discusses the phenomenon
of economic rent or discusses the fact
that things could be different in order
to be a Prof uh a respected economist
you have to start off with
a what uh the British uh there is no uh
alternative Tina uh that that's their
their motto Margaret Thatcher uh so you
know Margaret Thatcher's spirit is is uh
that that of uh that sort of uh the
precondition the entry price uh that you
have to pay is to go along uh with the
vocabulary War for democracy even though
democracy turns out to be oligarchy uh
again we're dealing with all of this so
uh I've had to basically self-publish uh
all of my books through the Institute uh
that I'm associated with uh Harvard
published a few of the early volumes of
our studies uh our aerological and
archaeological studies uh a couple of
volumes but uh they they weren't widely
picked up by the rest of the profession
because uh again if you talk about uh uh
how uh ver
2,000 years the samarians Babylonians
early uh Judaism uh canceled the debts
more or less regularly uh with new
rulers the the very thought that debts
can be cancelled is anathema
uh we're talking about things that can't
be taught there's a tunnel vision and
that tunnel vision is spread to the
people who've been promoted within the
bricks countries to try to say how are
we going to restructure the society
because many of them have been promoted
by this the National Endowment for
democracy has all of these
non-government organization that have
been promoting PE uh uh individuals who
they see when they go through the
universities or in practice that sort of
are willing to follow the US neoliberal
line and uh they're promoted and that's
why the country of Georgia recently has
banned or asserted the abil ility to
close down non-government organizations
that are really trying for a regime
change to get rid of any regime U
politicians members or uh influential
people who speak talk speak about the
Unspeakable well Herman Khan wrote a
book thinking about the unthinkable you
know about the atom bomb well we're not
only thinking about the unthinkable but
we're saying there's a 100 Years of
people who've talked about the
unthinkable wouldn't you want to hear
how Western Civilization has been
developing since uh 1800 or the American
Revolution or 1776 with the Adam Smith's
wealth of nation uh there's uh it it's a
kind of passive censorship that's been
nurtured by um I think ever since World
War II the attempt by the United States
to prevent uh any discussion of an
alternative well I'm really struck I
know that Rick has already left and I'm
I I probably should have said this while
he's here but you began your response by
saying that you're both in your 80s
you've both seen a lot of this you're
some of the last two economists that
came from a certain generation and It
just strikes me how lucky I am to be
able to sit here in Queens and have the
two of you to myself and ask you these
questions that hundreds of thousands of
people are going to be watching it's
it's it's just pretty mind-blowing well
it's not luck you've chosen to I mean
you've been able to see us you've you've
looked through uh uh I won't say you've
looked through the whole mine and found
uh The Ore uh there must be a less
egotistical way of saying this but you
found this and other people haven't yeah
yeah and and there's a lot that's going
on behind the scenes that people don't
don't see but what I wanted to ask you
about and I know Rick had to leave so we
didn't get to talk about it together but
he mentioned that that in one of our
recent
conversations well it was pretty much
the entire conversation we spent 3 hours
talking about the decline of the
American
Empire and this was a very wide ranging
discussion we talked about the bricks we
talked about Israel and
Palestine
and I want to know how you think about
if you agree with him that the American
Empire is in Decline but also how you
might view this in connection to Marxism
which is just which has been the theme
of our discussion will you give me three
hours like you gave Richard you can have
as much time as you
want
uh the American Empire is in decline
because it's no longer the spirit of
industrial capitalism that made the
country rich in the first place uh the
first thing that the uh uh I wrote my
dissertation on the American School of
protectionists uh the American School of
economics and it was protectionist it
saw the state as protecting uh the
development of industrial capitalism and
especially preventing uh England and
English Finance from taking over the
country uh the American decline has been
a series of uh processes one of the the
great uh derailing of American progress
occurred in
1913 uh with
the Federal Reserve creation uh the big
Bankers JP Morgan uh got all the big
Bankers together and said we've got to
we've got to prevent the US government
from uh playing a role in the economy uh
we've got to uh take over what the US
Treasury was doing and create it in the
hands of private Bankers without any
government officials uh and that was
what the Federal Reserve was so the
Federal Reserve was created uh to
essentially with 12 districts just like
the treasury had 12 uh uh District Banks
uh but all of the decision making was
taking away out of Washington to the
Financial Centers to uh New York
primarily which is sort of uh where uh
the Federal Reserve intervene in in
Market Boston Philadelphia Chicago where
the current the uh Commodities exchange
was uh San Francisco where the gold was
uh being produced uh and uh the uh
instead of the government
steering Finance into the financing of
Industry uh the Federal Reserve steered
Finance into making money at the expens
of Industry uh and and initially right
after 1913 you had World War I uh and
then you had the financial sector
insisting on the repayment of uh foreign
uh of inter Allied debts and that led to
the depression uh because the Allies
said well oh if now that America wants
us to pay for the cost of uh the arms
that it sold us going into war we'll
make Germany pay the reparations and it
all became a tangle where uh it it uh
EUR England France Germany were all
reduced uh to depressions so uh you you
had a kind of uh American uh that
empowered America that ended up uh as
fascism began to develop in the 1930s uh
Europeans sent their gold to the United
States for safekeeping and by uh 1945
the United States had so much gold that
it uh was able to deter uh to first of
all U get English support of a a very uh
us- centered system saying other
countries cannot create their own
currency other countries cannot create
their own money uh and uh plan the
economies uh whoever has the gold or who
has the US Dollars uh will be in charge
of planning the postwar world so the
United States by being very
self-centered financially created a
emphasis on the financial worldview and
finance capitalism that became more and
more predatory in character uh and so as
you as uh especially after 1980s when uh
you had the beginning of uh corporate
takeovers of uh debt financed uh uh
takeovers and junk bonding uh and uh the
the whole idea uh of uh not only junk
bonding that the idea that fortunes were
to be made by debt leveraging by
borrowing money to buy assets that the
Federal Reserve would then uh lend money
to the banks to bid up the price of real
estate companies and the price of a home
or real estate is whatever Banks would
lend and so the Federal Reserve uh and
ass The Fanny May and the other
government real estate agencies uh made
a completely different world from uh
what seemed to be a promise of uh uh
American prosperity in
1945 even in the 1960s when I was
growing up and buying a house uh there
were rules that all the banks had for
Lending mortgages as long as you were
white they wouldn't lent them to blacks
but as long as you were white uh you
needed to make a down payment of maybe
20% you'd get a 30-year mortgage uh but
the rule that the banks had was we're
going to give you a mortgage but it has
to be within your ability to pay 25% of
your income well if a bank will only
lend you money enough mortgage money to
buy a house limited to 25% of your
income that means that uh you're not
going to be able to outbid other buyers
uh who let's say have the terms that
Banks lend today uh 43 now Fanny May
will government guarantee uh bank loans
for 43% of your income well if American
labor has to pay 43% of its income
instead of 25% of its income and if the
mortgages aren't 30 years but they're
very short much shorter then you're
going to have uh employers uh having to
pay workers enough to live in a house
and uh I know more and more workers are
now living in their car but the idea was
a worker should have a house not have to
live in the car or be homeless and um
the uh the result is that uh the
financialization of real estate of
Corporations uh stocks and bonds began
to price America out of the market so as
American wages were bit up by the cost
of living by uh
privatizing uh healthc Care by priva
iing uh education uh there's no way that
American labor today can make a living
wage uh and uh compete with the labor
Asian Labor uh labor anywhere else in
the world so the corporation said well
we can't afford American labor anymore
let's invite China and uh that's
uh 1998 uh I guess Clinton invited China
into the World Trade Organization the
Americans decided let's have foreign
labor so America shifted all of its
industry outside of the United States
saying uh
money industry doesn't make fortunes
anymore fortunes are made by
de-industrializing the country Let's uh
shift the industry abroad and we'll just
make money in predatory ways we'll make
money from uh we'll have American Banks
go to China and we'll make the money to
the banks and the banks will make all of
the profits uh the the interest rates uh
that
gets from uh inflating Chinese uh prices
will will U buy up a Chinese industry
we'll make we'll get the profits from
Chinese industry and we'll make the
monopolies and uh move all the money
here well much to their surprise China
didn't let them do that it was not like
Germany or like England or other
countries they actually uh had were
acting in their own self-interest and uh
the result is that you have China's uh
economy growing much more more well one
of the problems with uh limiting the
Americans from understanding that
America was losing its place in the
world was comparing GDP well look at how
much our GDP is growing compared to
other countries but as we discussed
earlier in this uh talk what is GDP uh
it you think of it as grow national
product but uh the grow national product
includes all of the interest rates that
Banks charge all of the penalty charges
are called providing economic uh
Financial Services that's what it is in
the national income and product account
uh they include uh Monopoly rents that's
all part of the profits There's no
distinction between Monopoly rent and
profit uh the uh the homeowners
uh view uh estimate of what they would
have to pay for their house if they had
to rent their house that's included in
as a product in uh GDP so much of uh the
GDP isn't a product and if the Americans
had uh not only their self celebrating
GDP accounts showing that uh America's
rent Seekers the ronas are most of the
GDP and mo most of this growth in
American Income is all for the 1% not
for the 99% then they'd realize wait a
minute if you compare our real GDP uh
the production G GDP with uh what's what
China's real production GDP you think
it's not like just America a little bit
behind it's like this it's like
America's uh not producing anything
anymore that all we are is a parasite on
the rest of the the world well the rest
of the world no other country is trying
to uh produce a a rentree GDP but if
they were doing that they'd realize what
their advantage is and they'd realize
how they can
they can break free of this
anti-classical economics uh I call it
it's it's really anti-classical as much
as anti-marxism and not only against
Marxism it's the whole idea that there
is such a thing as unearned income the
whole idea of of uh classical idea of
free markets well then you'd see that
America is uh actually ha has what Marx
would call a false consciousness it's a
belief that you're doing fine when
you're not doing fine at all it's like
the uh the uh belief by the
military-industrial complex that we're
making such
wonderful uh uh armaments and tanks and
aircraft uh that we spend so much more
than Russia spends on it uh that we must
be superior because we spend more
whereas uh the American Arms don't work
they're not arms for fighting they're
armless for making uh
profits from uh the government they're
not it's like wine we said before it's
not like making wine to be drink it's
wine drunk It's wine to be traded well
that that's what the arms are so the
Americans and don't have a way of
estimating what their position in the
world is relative to other countries and
they don't realize how while they
thought that they were getting a
stronger and stronger economy they were
actually getting a more uh rent ravaged
economy an economy that has polarized
between the upper 1% that doesn't make
its money by building factories and
introducing new technology and
increasing productivity but just makes
it some money by uh essentially
disassembling uh
de-industrializing uh the economy and uh
that's uh that the uh this
self-destructive character in the
American economy is uh has been a major
factor in the decline uh the other part
talking about the balance of payments is
America's military spending uh the
entire us balance of payments deficit
that forced America off gold in 1971 was
caused by the uh foreign military
spending uh the United States has spent
an enormous amount of money uh uh for uh
getting supplying the 800 military bases
around the rest of the world uh and that
is uh leading to a a weakness in the
dollar and the whole source of strength
of the American Empire's ability to uh
dominate domineer uh Europe uh the
global South other countries was the
strength of the dollar it no longer had
the strength of the dollar uh it's
become uh not only a deor country but
it's built up so as it's been pumping
dollars into foreign central banks uh
it's become obvious to other countries
that instead of becoming the well
Financial wealthiest country in the
world it's a net debtor and there's no
way that America can pay its foreign
debts uh to foreign central banks and
foreign governments to keep their uh
National wealth funds in the United
States so other countries are beginning
to realize this you can they say they
can calculate what's America's Trade
Surplus what how much earnings uh does
America get each year what is the source
of Revenue what is it spending abroad uh
immigrants uh remittances military
spending and it realized that America's
going to uh runin up more and more debt
that it can pay how do we avoid the
situation if can why why are we uh in
investing in treasury bond our economic
surplus that we're gaining our export
Surplus uh why do we lend it to the
government that is going to spend it on
making military bases all around us so
that it can divide China into five
countries divide Russia into anywhere
from between four and 20 countries why
are we giving why are we financing
America's military attack on us uh why
don't we dollarize and that's uh that's
been the discussion now for two years D
dollarization well if other countries do
not wind down their Holdings of dollars
if they replace them with gold and what
is going to be in uh October of 2024
something like a brick currency or
bricks
uh uh Market Basket of currencies
without the dollar this is going to mean
that uh foreign uh transactions uh if
India and uh uh the near uh Saudi Arabia
uh have a deal in oil they're not
they're not going to do it with dollars
anymore other countries are going to
free themselves from dollars and uh
you're having do uh gold play a larger
and larger role other the dollar is
still a very strong proportion of U
other countries Holdings because they
realize it's strong because America has
the atom bomb but America the dollar is
the atom bomb that's and what it is
America can't invade another country
because it doesn't have troops uh it
it there's very little uh that it can do
except terrorism and regime change to
try to prevent all of this uh and other
countries are now figuring out how do we
get free of all this and America by
sanctioning Russia by sanctioning China
by having Europe uh isolate itself and
isolate the west from Russia and China
and countries that do things in a
different way uh this is forc these
other countries to produce for
themselves instead of importing from the
United States or its allies so the
sanctions have strengthened Russia has
strengthened China has strengthened Iran
uh and uh
the sanctions are now instead of
isolating the rest of the world uh
countries that do things that America
doesn't like all of a sudden Americans
have found out wait a minute we've
isolated ourselves we're all alone and
with uh if nobody wants our dollars what
what can we give them for uh in exchange
for what they produce we're not
producing anything and there's no way
that we can produce anything as long as
our uh economy has so much rent overhead
so much debt overhead so much Financial
overhead so much Monopoly overhead that
we can't compete with any other country
we're all by ourselves that means that
uh uh there's going to be a financial
crisis here that corporations will go
under they realize that the the end of
their world is near but for them this is
the end of the world because that's
their tunnel vision perspective and uh
they uh they won't talk about it because
it's so unpleasant it's like you know
most people of Richard and my age don't
like to talk about death upsets their
wives uh to do that well that's how
America feels about the fact that uh the
system is self-destructive Finance
capitalism is self-destructive so it's
not that other countries have decided to
go communist and uh uh break from the
United States and be anti-American
America destroyed itself its own economy
and by destroying its own economy by
financializing it instead of continuing
to industrialize itself uh it's uh cut
it it's uh deprived itself of any
leverage over the world except it's
military leverage in bribery it can use
all these dollars to bribe and you know
like it's easy to bribe a Western
European politician I mean they're
corrupt they're all idea of rising is
corrupt to them it's not corrupt it's
how you get Advanced how you get they
it's not corruption that we're getting
from this non-government organization
it's support for what we're doing for
ourselves it's funny though because I
think in the in the west we have it the
other way around where we say oh it's
the Eastern politicians that thrive on
bribery well but uh if it's bribery it's
interpersonal bribery you'll bribe a
policeman or something but America's
made bribery a part of the National
Endowment for democracies funding it's
foreign our foreign policy is briber
uh basically and coercion and sometimes
more violent terrorist means of just
assassination like uh we we did in Chile
uh for for alende and like all sorts of
unexplained uh uh unfortunate uh
disappearances I'm I'm curious to hear a
bit more about how you think maybe
Marxism could help us analyze what's
going on in some of these other
countries and areas that I mentioned
like the bricks countries and how
they're fairing in today's economy I
know you have a lot of experience with
South America in the past I'm not so
sure how how Central it is to your
research today but I just thought I
might ask to see if you had any thoughts
on I don't even want to call it Marxism
it's really classical economics Marx is
sort of the culmination of classical
economics so uh when people say
U Marxism they mean the whole body of
value and price and rent Theory uh based
on the concept of economic rent is
unearned predatory income by uh a class
of ronas that the economy can do without
of so uh that that's really it it's you
you if you call us classical Economist
as Richard said it's all how you phrase
what you're saying you don't have to
come right out and say we're Marxist you
can say you know we Adam is right uh
land uh Society shouldn't have landlords
because landlords uh
uh don't produce anything and as John
Stewart Mill said the landlord makes
money in his sleep that's not productive
well you don't have to quote marks for
all of these things uh because marks uh
you accepted all of that he didn't have
to repeat what Adam Smith and John
Stewart Mill and Ricardo and the others
said uh because they'd already said it
all he said no I'm putting it together
with how does this uh now that you've uh
described what we want to get rid of in
feudalism uh and the legacy of feudalism
now how is this capitalism producing its
own exploitation
uh that has problems of itself so if you
say classical economics is including
Marxism uh that when then uh you're able
to get people uh to listen to you more
uh the only reason uh that uh
uh Richard and I uh are defined as
Marxist is that only the marxists are
talking about Adam what Adam Smith
really said he wasn't uh what the Adam
Smith Institute under Margaret Thatcher
uh planning privatization said uh he was
talking about businessmen can't get
together without conspiring uh with each
other
uh are Marx includes a completely
different view of classical economics
than the anti-classical economics that
people taught are taught today and
they're not uh when Richard and I went
to school they still talked about the
history of economic thought they don't
have they don't have those classes
anymore they've replaced them with
mathematical e economics and the
mathematical e economics are tunnel
vision because what is it that you're
going to measure and if you're measuring
GDP
then you're not thinking about wait a
minute what are the components of GDP do
we really want to
include providing Financial Services by
charging penalty rates by credit card
companies is that really should it be
part of GDP or not so uh you you
essentially uh introduce different
categories of thinking the difference
between productive and unproductive
investment uh Financial investment is
not part of the production process asss
that's part of the de-industrializing
process what's productive and what's not
what is economic rent and what is profit
uh
and once you deal with the very
definitions the definitions themselves
describe a whole uh different economic
system with laws of motion I wrote a
book on this uh J is for drunk economics
uh and I should have called it uh the
economics the vocabulary of economic
deception and reality uh because if you
just use what the classical economists
say you it's like parts of a jigsaw
puzzle you put them all together and it
comes out as leading to socialism and in
the 19th century late 19th century
everybody realized this they were all
calling what was happening socialism in
one way or another but they uh it turned
out that the winning form of course is
Nazism national socialism of Hitler uh
that they didn't want uh classical
socialism they didn't want Marxist
socialism they wanted uh Nazism and
that's what uh uh America now calls
Nazism democracy uh with the two
greatest democracies being uh Israel and
uh Ukraine uh and they both share a
visceral racial hatred ethnic hatred for
people who don't believe what they do
who speak a different language than they
do so U once the American foreign policy
decided uh we will uh we will support
any country that's a Nazi country uh and
call it a democracy and depict the world
conflict
of crisis of civilization between
uh authoritarianism means the state is
acting on behalf of the people or a
democracy meaning oligarchy meaning
Financial oligarchy uh then uh indeed uh
if you just realize what the vocabulary
mean uh there is a split in Civilization
today and it's between uh the uh a
financial oligarchy defending Itself by
the most violent uh America's Foreign
Legion uh the Foreign Legion of uh it
began with Isis and Al-Qaeda uh formed
under the Carter Administration uh is
the alternative to the secular uh
productive Society of Afghanistan to
destroy the secular society and uh re uh
destroy the uh equality of women uh and
uh the fascism you Nazism you have in
Ukraine and uh the apartheid state in
Israel once you realize that that's uh
the fight for civilization you say well
then what is what are these countries
that America calls authoritarian that
means where the state prevents rent
seeking the state acts to treat money as
a private utility the state tries to
prevent Rising uh housing prices is
being paid to the bank as mortgage
interest uh because we will the
government will collect the rising value
of the rising price of uh some locations
as the economy gets more productive and
uh we won't have to have an income tax
on labor or a value added tax that falls
on consumers or a flat tax that is
anti-progressive all these things are
things that America is is producing they
have to be able to spill it out but U my
students in China tell me that uh they
uh their jobs are uh usually over
shadowed by Chinese students that study
economics and American universities well
if China sends its economic students to
American universities how are they going
to learn about these things if uh the
bricks countes send their students here
how are they going to have the
vocabulary and the economic terminology
and the concepts of economic rent that
they need to reinvent the wheel uh by
saying how did uh Europe how did the
classical political Economist solve this
problem in Europe to get rid of the the
rent seeking the financialization the
monopolization how it's all been done
before all they have to do is is look at
how it was done before and uh was going
on pretty good lines uh and how did it
how did it evolve in a good way and Marx
is describing all of these changes in
terms of the laws of motion and if the
brick country is saying what kind of
Laws of Motion do we want our economies
to be uh restructured and follow that's
how you will find create the same kind
of productive economy that the late 19th
century was created from the United
States to
Germany well while we are on the topic
of the decline of the American Empire
when Rick and I spoke a couple of days
ago we spoke all about the upcoming
election when this airs I don't know
maybe it'll be the the recent election
but the question that I had in mind is I
know that you're an expert on on tariffs
and one of the aspects we spoke about
was the United States relationship to
China and how tariffs were a key policy
of Trump's uh 8 to four years ago so I
was wondering if you had any thoughts in
this
area yes the the uh Trump tariff policy
is the opposite of the 19th century
American tariff policy the idea of a a
tariffs protective tariffs in the 19th
century was uh if you raise uh the price
of uh imported goods you will create a
price umbrella that will enable American
companies to make Capital Investments
and earn the profits to be able to U
make an investment to become independent
from Reliance on England and other
Western European countries so protective
terrorist meant they called it sometimes
infant industry uh it was to develop
industry uh today's uh the tariffs that
U Trump is proposing and I'm sure that
uh any Democratic Administration would
continue of 20% on China uh products uh
you are not going to uh promote any uh
infant or developed industry in the
United States because for the reasons
we've described America's already made
Itself uncompetitive by privatizing what
should be a social public utility by
privatizing Finance by privatizing
health Care by privatizing the cost of
Education imagine uh if uh if Americans
have to pay4 to $50,000 a year in debt
to be sure uh to get a college degree to
get a job if they have to go into debt
to buy a car to drive to the job uh if
they have to pay uh for 18% of GDP on
Healthcare then uh Healthcare alone
other countries can provide the entire
wage for just what Americans have to pay
for healthare uh this is there's no way
that you can uh nurture a a new industry
in the United States so uh if the
tariffs are not going to protuct an
industry uh and develop a means of
becoming independent uh what are they
going to do tariffs in a way are the
opposite of sanctions it's as if another
country sanctioned the our country and
we have to uh pay develop our own
industry with when America sanctioned uh
Russia it's the that's the equivalent of
uh Russia putting an infinitely High
tariff on its industry and the sanctions
are nurturing Russian in infant industry
and infant Agriculture and infant infant
all sorts of uh things it it's developed
their independence but in the United
States all the tariffs can do are two
things one it can uh it'll raise the
price for uh imports from China which
means Walmart's prices are going to go
way way up but also the tariffs are
going to uh create revenue for the
United States and one of the advantages
of tariffs uh for the United uh William
Seward who was uh Lincoln's foreign
secretary
uh basically said well when you raise
tariffs that provides enough income that
you don't have to tax industry uh well
uh in in this case uh it'll Finance
government spending and the terrorists
will finance our spending to build the
Erie Canal U infrastructure uh and uh
sewards Economist Rus pan Smith whom I
wrote my dissertation on developed this
um you know the general idea of tariffs
and it worked for the United States now
now um in the if the United States uh
gets this revenue from China and says
all you know we know that you know your
profit rates are not all that high but
uh the money the uh whatever you export
to us we're going to take that 20% and
that's going to be how we Finance our
military expenditure around you so that
we can carve you up into other countries
when we begin to destroy you because
you're our number one enemy uh that
essentially almost word for word what
tff has been saying they're our enemy
Biden says they're our number one enemy
uh we want them to pay our uh cost our
expenses uh of uh financing our military
surrounding of them and tariffs are how
are we going to do it it's going to
raise money for the treasury well China
has a number of responses are going to
be and I should have said one of the uh
factors that have led to the America
decline in the world is it has a policy
it never expects any other country to
respond to it it thinks of We're the
actors in every other country's passive
they're not going to do anything except
till
take uh have to follow whatever we do
and that's the law for them that's a
rules B order based order is we make the
rules you follow them whatever we do to
you you'll have to accept well what if
China then says well okay we're going to
raise our ex our own export uh tax by
20% so that our government should get
20% well that's going to increase the
export race and now uh your tariff is
going to be the the equivalent of 30%
well that by that point you're going to
get a 50% increase in the price of
almost everything we get from China and
China's already said well if you're
going
to uh have tariffs against our exports
then we can't earn enough money uh to
buy uh uh to buy things from you uh
we're going to so we don't have to
export for much for you since you don't
need the money to buy from us so we're
going to stop exporting to you uh
geranium uh gallium uh the rare earth uh
we're we're not going to export cadmium
to you uh we're aluminum we we doing
most of the aluminum refining we don't
have to export that now that uh there
you know we want to keep the trade
balanced uh between us and if you don't
buy from us we'll just scale everything
back it said the same thing to Europe
you're uh America told Europe you have
to uh sanction China because uh you're
uh if you trade with a country you're
dependent on it and break your
dependence on China by not exporting to
it and so China's now cut back its
exports to Europe saying look uh you
know uh you're complaining Europe that
our trade is unbalanced between us uh
well there are plenty things we'd like
to buy from here there's a Dutch company
that makes uh engra uh ultraviolet
engraving uh machinery for uh for the uh
what we need for computer chips uh won't
you won't you sell us this Machinery
we're glad to buy from you the Americans
say no no don't export anything to China
that it needs uh for potentially
military uses so China said well if you
won't sell to us what's our Point why do
we need to sell what do we need Euros
for you know there's no need for that so
we don't need any Euros to buy from you
so you know we'll just cut back so the
sanctioning of the sanctions that are
being imposed by the Trump
Administration and the bid
Administration together are isolating
the United States from these countries
uh and so it's not simply a question of
pricing American labor out of the market
it's there are are essential raw
materials America is getting its uranium
enriched uranium from Russia for all of
this it's getting it was getting what it
needs for the outer space
uh not missiles but uh spaceships uh
from Russia well uh and especially the
uh uh the explosion Chambers where all
the uh the Flames come out of well that
was made I think in Ukraine and uh in
Western Russia well it's not they've cut
that that out so uh there's you're going
to have a break in the supply chain well
a break in the supply chain like if uh
imagine uh if boing can't right now
can't get certain parts for its
airplanes it has to stop making the
whole airplane well uh the the war with
China of a combination of sanctions
against trade with China and the tariffs
are going to lead China to cut back its
exports of uh starting with ke Imports
that American industry and especially
the American Military need China will
say well you know okay you think the new
uh rules-based order of trade is you
don't give another country uh any
exports that will help it make war on
you okay you're saying that's for us
let's we'll go along with that we're not
we're not going to export to you uh
things that are going to help uh help
well already the United States for
instance has said uh going to Intel uh
that makes computer chips and say we
don't want you to uh export the fast
computer chips to China because they may
put it in a missile and they may aim the
missile at us and blow us up so Intel uh
has been
blocked from making exports to China
well the result is Intel is now going
broke it said well wait a minute China
was our Major Market without China we're
not a profitable company anymore uh it's
now put itself up for sale it says uh we
can't make profits without selling to
China that was our Market well so
America foreign policy U from both uh
Trump and the the Republicans and the
Democrats not just Trump and Biden it's
the whole uh Congress is uh uh is so
adversarial treating the whole rest of
the world as an enemy that it is uh uh
is pursuing a policy that not only is
pricing America out of the market that
is increasing the cost of uh consumer
goods that we'll have to that uh people
buy to keep the cost of living down the
American uh inflation will go way up
that means that the real wages are going
to go down that means more pressure for
Rising wages uh but most of all it means
that uh uh the aircraft industry the
military industry uh the uh computer uh
industry the uh artificial uh
intelligence industry all of these are
going to have Supply chains
interruptions and the whole process is
going to come to a close Russia won't
send us sell us the improved uranium uh
to make the B to make the bombs or the
electric uh the uh nuclear uh Power
utilities uh work uh you're you're going
to all of a sudden uh it's as if they're
bombing our economy but the bombs are a
legal bomb imposed by the Republicans
and Democrats and Congress saying you
know we want to be separate from them uh
but it won't be separate and equal uh
it'll be we're going to be set we're
we're no longer going to get what we
need from them and so we're going to be
an economy that doesn't get what we need
to uh continue to industrialize and
there goes American Prosperity companies
are going to close down inel has uh
scaled back its employment saying well
you know we don't need to employ you
workers anymore because uh we're not
allowed to export your product to China
uh and that's the growing Market because
there's not much Market in America
because we've moved all the production
to
Asia and the Asians would simply buy
from us and sell it to China so uh
essentially uh America's uh cutting its
own throat in terms of foreign trade
uh because of the uh the Tariff and that
of course was Trump's lead policy he
said you know I'm leading my whole
policy with a 20% tar uh T tariff to
punish Russia that's going to hurt him
he also talks about uh trying he said
I'll end the war in Russia within one
week well there there is there's only
one way to end the uh in Ukraine we'll
end the war in one one week there's only
one way to do that to hydrogen bomb
Russia with 20 hydrogen bombs if you
don't do that you don't end the war in
one week uh is that what Trump is saying
or is he just ignorant well the LA his
first Secretary of State said he's
really a uh and I'm resigning
going back to Standard Oil uh and it uh
the the politicians don't have any idea
of Economics because they've never taken
an economic course in I won't say
Marxism In classical economics the uh
nobody who's in a position of analyzing
America's strength and
weaknesses understands what's uh what's
happening the situation in uh American
economic policy is the same in military
policy the military analysts who have uh
talked about how Russia is winning the
war in Ukraine uh and uh Israel is sort
of uh ending Itself by its uh
the policies that it's U what it's doing
to uh the Palestinians and now to the
Lebanese uh they are they've been forced
out of the CIA uh people like uh mcgn uh
and uh uh Colonel they go right down uh
uh the line for all of the military uh
analysts who uh found had to leave the
uh the military leave the state
department leave the department of uh
you know Homeland Security because they
they didn't agree with the neocon
directions they're saying look your
neocon direction is not going to work
well that's not the way you get promoted
in the state department or any of the uh
in the military or the CIA uh there and
you're not promoted you end up leaving
and you go on the talk shows and you for
people who leave and there are a couple
of talk shows on on the internet that
feature them uh that are uh they're
called the realists and uh the the
neocons don't like the realists because
they Pander to American politics that's
not based on a realistic world view but
on sort of the fantasy of US versus them
and we can beat them even as we
de-industrialized our country even if we
create a class war here lowering uh real
wages while uh siphoning off all of the
income to the wealthiest 1% that own the
the bond holders uh basically uh the
people who uh the financial managers of
Corporations uh the stockholders uh not
not the uh
uh the people not the employees well uh
you without a realistic economic policy
or a realistic military policy how are
you going to have uh a uh a strategy
that uh works with the rest of the world
except to say if you don't do what we
want we'll bomb you you know we'll have
our Foreign Legion we'll we'll set uh
Isis and Al-Qaeda on you if you're in
the Middle East we'll set the Nazis on
you uh you know if you're in Russia or
Europe you know we have Nazi uh groups
all all over there that we can promote
uh if you're in a Africa uh we'll have
uh again Isis is is there you know we
our our foreign Legions are there uh the
Israelis are also have a whole uh
contingent fighting in Ukraine alongside
the Nazis uh against the Russians
because uh the common native common
denominator they both hate Russians for
different reasons uh the uh the Nazis uh
the Israelis hate Russians because of
their anti-Semitism that they had in the
19th century under zaris and uh the
Nazis fight Russians because uh they
weren't
anti-semitic uh I mean it's very uh it's
it's ironic so the election is going to
be continued to go down the unrealistic
path that it's going down now and it
will uh follow economic and trade
policies that are not only going to
raise the Consumer Price Index for the
consumer goods that we import from uh
China and other countries but it'll U
it'll lead to a u Mutual will trade the
trade War uh will not be like it was uh
in the uh 1930s raising tariffs against
each other at just not trading at all
not we not competing for markets we're
withdrawing from markets and that's what
America's done a trade War you're
supposed to win markets some other
countries one way or another today's
trade war is we're going to cut off
Market to you you'll cut off Market to
us and we're just ending up with America
being isolated without any uh analysis
say well wait a minute if we don't get
the raw materials uh the the energy the
uh Industrial Products the food from uh
the global majority how are we going to
uh start again uh as if we're back in
the 19th century the the economy will be
wrecked so you could say that both
economy both parties agree that it's
desirable to wreck the American economy
and uh there's a reason for that you
make more money from an economy that's
being wrecked from than you do from an
economy that's thriving you make it
quicker because companies that go
bankrupt uh the U financial sector the
corporate Raiders can pick them up for a
song you know and uh and then once they
pick him up for a song they can then say
all right we're going to go back to a
reasonable world and now all the
companies that we've taken over for a
song now they'll be profitable again but
the problem is that uh America is
creating irreversibilities uh and the
irreversibility is the emergence of
bricks saying we don't need America or
Europe we can now depend on ourselves
for Mutual gain and mutual trade so uh
there's no way to reverse the
irreversible uh and uh the uh the pl
financial plan of bankrupting companies
picking them up at distress sale prices
uh it'll will be that this doesn't uh
pull the economy out of distress you'll
have a distressed economy where
companies are going bankrupt they uh cut
back employment the workers will not be
able to pay their rents they won't be
able to pay their credit card fees their
mortgage uh payments their auto loans
you're already finding as we've talked
before uh loans going into arar uh you
already have a 40% office uh vacancy
rate here in New York City there what
are we going to do with these vacant
offices well they're talking about maybe
we can rent it out is uh luxury property
well uh the problem is that these
offices aren't very good for uh
residential property who are you going
to do your grocery shopping you know if
you live in a nice Wall Street Building
and what are you going to do for air
conditioning and what are you going to
do for light they're going to be a lot
of rooms that don't have any light in
them uh what are you going to do for
these the financial times on Friday just
had a Sim discussion about uh their
financial uh Financial City uh that
they've uh that the reichmans uh
developed uh 30 or 40 years ago uh the
the building the financial buildings
that had Banks know that England is uh
taken uh itself out of the Euro zone are
uh largely vacant and they well maybe we
can rent them out there's a hoing short
housing shortage in London uh look at
all the advantages of um the uh the
financial area there there were a lot of
we government spent a lot of money with
a jubilee line making uh uh extensions
you can get to it easily but again it's
a it's a desert it's very it's not
doesn't feel like a neighborhood uh
there are no stores on the buildings are
not designed to have stores on the
ground floor like you work down K
Boulevard you know their uh coffee shops
their uh grocery stores their shoe shoe
stores there's uh how are you going to
make buildings that just have big
lobbies to impress you when you go into
an office building how are we going to
make that into a shoe store a a a
drugstore you know or a coffee shop it
it uh how are you going to handle the
air conditioning when you not only have
covid spreading but you have all these
new diseases that are spreading from uh
cattle and you have bird flu you have
cattle flu you have all of these things
that are developing uh you need to uh
re-engineer all the buildings it a lot
of uh developers saying well you know
it's really cheaper to tear them all
down and uh begin all over again and uh
they uh
the there's a discussion that from
England in the financial times to the
United States it may be easier for
American listeners to understand it when
it's in a foreign country than they can
understand it here because they don't
like to hear bad news about America so
if we're talking talking about England
you know they're describing you know
what are we going to do with all of
these Office Buildings that now are uh
not occupied now that we're
de-industrializing uh well uh if you
want to see where American capitalism is
leading look at what Margaret Thatcher
did to England that's libertarian that's
the Republican policy let's have a a low
State let's get rid of the state it's
the road to suron as Hayak said and as
Margaret Thatcher said we we won't have
any government reg uh ability to
regulate the economy and the Supreme
Court as you know a few months ago said
uh government agencies can no longer uh
impose regulations on companies uh that
the regulations will have to be passed
by Congress agencies have no power at
all to uh regulate the economy with
professionals it has to be the
politicians whose campaigns are paid for
by the donors who from the very class
that the politicians used to be able to
regulate but now they uh they can't
appoint Regulators to do it and they
follow uh their the deregulates who pay
for their political campaigns so uh
getting rid of campaign uh uh getting
rid of well permitting campaign Finance
of the donor class is another reason why
the American Empire is going under if
you have politicians who are um
following the rules set by the donor
class both the Republicans and the
Democrats often have the same donors
certainly from the same Industries uh
the uh uh automatic intelligence
industry the the military industrial
complex especially the oil industry big
agriculture uh if you have uh these
companies financing politics then you're
not going to have uh politicians backing
uh prosperity for the 99 % they're going
to back prosperity for the 1% of the
monopolists or the finance years or the
rent extractors that are their campaign
contributors and so uh you you have the
political system as part of this tunnel
vision that as Richard and I have just
been saying uh have led to this uh uh
inability to understand the laws of
motion of where the American economy is
going where Finance capitalism is going
and uh where America's role in the world
is relative where other countries have
the option of going and your only hope
is that other countries are just as
unrealistic that they don't know what to
do either that they have been so used to
the uh following the American plan that
made it dominant a century ago that they
don't realize that we're no longer a
century ago we're no longer in the World
postor War I World the completely
different world and it it seems that
that the whole world is operating with a
tunnel vision in the dark that's uh
what's so ironic about all this
uh we materialists uh think that people
are going and countries are going to act
in their own self economic self-interest
but neither the United States nor the
other countries are acting in their
self-interest how on Earth do you
project what countries are going to do
if they don't know what their
self-interest is that's uh what makes
being a futurist so difficult in the
past it was easy to be a futurist back
in the
1970s uh Alvin Toffler uh Herman Khan
and I you we all we used to talk
together all the time uh we'd all pretty
much agree well here the interests of
Industry here's the interest of oil
here's the interest of milit you know we
can see what the interests were and you
just forecast uh uh here's what uh
German interest is going to be English
uh you can't do that anymore because
nobody knows what their interests are
and their all
flailing that's the problem that you
have how do you forecast what uh What uh
countries are going to do when they're
leaders don't know what they're
doing and don't know what their
advantage is you can no longer think
what's reasonable for them to do because
they don't know what's reasonable
because they don't have a way of
thinking about what's reasonable or what
their interest is you deserve a round of
applause for that you're not going to
compliment yourself so I'm just just
going to say a little bit for our
listeners I mean they they've seen you
on the show many times same with Rick
and something that I often hear
something I heard a lot after our last
episode which I think you agree is one
of maybe the best interviews you've ever
done and we've both heard that a lot of
people tell me about that episode that
they are just blown away by how
knowledge not only how knowledgeable you
are about your domains within economics
but how fluently you can speak about
them and what I wanted to say was to to
give our listeners and our viewers just
a very brief and a brief look at the
process that went into this interview
because it's probably going to be a lot
simpler than they think maybe I'm wrong
but essentially before having this
conversation you Rick and I decided on a
topic we decided we were going to talk
about about the development of Marxism
in the west how it has impacted today's
economy and how we can use it to
evaluate what's to come there was not an
extensive back and forth determining
exactly what we were going to talk about
all I did was write down a few bullet
points and I haven't even looked at them
I've jotted down the time a couple of
times because I need to keep that in
mind I've joted down a word or two that
the two of you have said just so that I
can keep it in mind the next time I say
something but the point is that before
we spoke you and I had or neither of us
yeah we had any idea that I was going to
ask you about Chinese tariffs that just
wasn't even on the table but I posed
that question essentially
spontaneously and you just gave I I
don't know maybe a 40 minute lecture on
it and yeah I see your face that's how
time flies and there are people who have
been studying it for 60 years that are
probably your age and and couldn't do
that the way that you just did so one
that's amazing I know a lot of smart
people and I don't know anybody who
could do what you just did but that I
mean raises the question since we're
going on we can talk a little bit about
how you think and and how you work how
is it do you think that you developed
the ability to just
spontaneously speak about a topic like
this with this depth for 40 minutes
without any preparation well I guess the
earliest speeches I heard were all
socialist speeches I heard M shackman
was a great speaker Terence McCarthy my
mentor was a great speaker uh just uh
writing writing books uh forced me to
rewrite and rewrite I'm I'm always
trying every book that I've written I've
been dis I I began to write what I think
will be a chapter about what I know
about and then while writing it I
discover something new and by the end of
the chapter I end up going back and
saying oh this is the point this is what
was happening and I end up rewriting it
so I've had I've thought thought through
all of this well i' I've dealt with
inter I started my uh professorship at
uh the new school in 1969 teaching
International economics and I wrote my
dissertation on American Trade uh uh
policy so the I I've had i' I've read
almost everything there was to read on
these topics so uh it's all sort of uh
by the tender age of 85 uh it all
filters out and you're able to see
what's important and uh uh what isn't so
it's really knowing what's important and
if you have a view of how the economy is
structured for me it's all value price
and rent it's a classical you you you
have a structure of looking at the
economy and once you look at the economy
in terms of what's important uh I've
I've taken the gross national income and
product accounts apart so I know all the
parts I put them together and once you
take something apart and put it together
I guess it's like someone who's taken an
automobile engine apart and puts it
together uh you you know what makes it
work and you know what's uh important uh
and I guess it's uh uh
from when uh I was a teenager and uh
talking to with a socialist talking to
uh people you don't have much time to
talk uh and I know when we were going to
uh a whole group of Americans were going
to Russia uh or when I was with the UN
going somewhere they would always have
me do the the the summary speech because
I could in two I could summarize it all
in two minutes it's just how I'm
thinking uh I think it's my musical
training uh in in music the uh if you
look at any Beethoven Sonata uh the
whole uh evolution of the Sonata is in
the first eight bars and you could say
that the whole the rest of the first of
the movement of the Sonata is the O
compano the composing out of these eight
bars so I've always organized my writing
uh I I never could compose good music I
ended up Throwing It All Away it was I I
didn't like it uh but I could do in
economics what I couldn't do uh in music
as a performer or a conductor and but
I'm still thinking in terms of the
musical development how do I summarize
in uh the first eight bars which for me
is usually the first page everything
that I'm doing uh in that chapter so I'm
used to uh thinking in terms of you know
what's the whole core and if you're
think uh the if you're thinking in terms
of the laws of motion of certain
categories uh uh balance of payments uh
g g rent GDP roner versus industry uh
the categories sort of uh are really
very simple and people who use longer uh
explanations don't have a set of basic
categories they look at phenomena if you
talk about the surface it's going to go
on and on and on but if you look at the
skeleton it's all very easy uh and you
don't have to go on and on describing
the surface hoping that somehow you're
going to get back to the skeletal
framework of what's happening so I think
it's a way of looking at uh the economy
in terms of the inner skeleton not just
uh uh the surface or you know what are
the what is a Trump versus Harris saying
it doesn't matter what they're saying
they're skimming the surface not going
to the essence well I'd like to return
to where we left off right before I
asked you that question and this was the
problem you raised of forecasting what's
going to happen when the leaders who are
ostensibly in charge of determining
what's going to happen don't know
anything about economics and they don't
know what they're doing and the question
that I have in mind hearkens back to
another question that I talked with Rick
about a couple of episodes ago and it
was about how he uses economics as a
tool to evaluate what's going on in the
world and he views economics as a tool
to get at the I think his phrase was
maybe the hidden
undercurrents of global politics culture
Society something something to this
effect and I'm wondering if this maybe
is where something something like
Marxism will come back into our
discussion where you look at classical
economics as you put it and you use that
as a way to predict what's going to
happen or to understand what's going to
happen when you can't count on these
leaders well here's the problem that
there's no way that you can fit what
Richard and I talk about into the
economics curriculum you can't fit a
critique of the GDP and the national
income accounts into the curriculum
because it's not taught any where I
think I was told that the only course uh
since World War II that was taught uh
dealt with the balance of payments was
the balance of payments course that I
gave actually in the statistics at the
new school I had the students uh I had I
uh use the format that I develop for us
balance of payment statistics and with
the world I said take how does this
relate to Japan how does this relate to
Europe how does this relate to Latin
American they all had they all actually
walked through statistic there's no
University economics course that teaches
people what are the components of GDP so
they get surprised when you tell them
they we haven't Tau that in school uh
they're not talked about you know what
is the balance of payments they look at
they think that when they talk about a
trade deficit that the trade deficit
means a balance of payments deficit when
actually a lot of uh What uh the value
of foreign trade doesn't involve similar
payments they won't get into that but
I've written books about that uh there's
there's no understanding of what the
words mean it's all there it's like
they're talking about uh something very
abstract that really should be taught
maybe in the literature Department it
should not uh be it it shouldn't be
called economics anymore it's it's all a
hypothetical world if you uh start with
this assumption then what follows but
you have to start all of your analysis
with assumptions that are false namely
that uh that Banks don't create money
like if you read you know someone who
doesn't know economics like Paul Krugman
uh he said Banks don't create money
they're intermediaries uh and uh they
you uh depositors put the money in Banks
and that give money the bank's money to
lend uh he doesn't realize that uh the
banks can create create deposits that
Banks lend Money Steve Kean has been
writing about this uh a lot in his
monetary analysis uh the uh we
there's no way to fit but none of us are
talking teaching economics anymore uh
there's no way to fit a realistic view
of the economy and even the concepts
that Define a an economy's Laws of
Motion into the curriculum that's taught
today and uh the universities are not
hiring any more tendered professors
because uh they have Financial managers
just like Boeing and uh uh other
companies have Financial managers and
they've decided that uh un unities can
save money by uh hiring uh Deans and uh
administrators whose job is to cut the
cost of what they have to pay to the
content providers to the professors so
universities are now replacing tenured
professors with a part timers adjuncts
uh they call them uh assoc visiting
assistant professors or adjuncts uh that
are paid maybe3 or $4,000 uh per class
instead of you know $100,000 or $200,000
year for a tened professor so you're
you're only going to get new graduates
who've gone through the brainwashing
program of what modern economic uh
teaching is to teach economics you'll
have to have it uh I think already in
the
1970s uh Elvin Toffler and I went away
for a weekend uh July 4th weekend to
discuss what kind of University dep
Department should we create that isn't
called economics and I thought why don't
you just call it futurism if you call it
doesn't mean anything and if it doesn't
mean anything it can mean whatever you
want uh you you but you you have to
realize that what we're saying is not in
competition with what the uh tunnel
visioned economics profession is all
about because uh we're not competing
with them we're not trying to uh project
GDP what it's going to be or employment
uh next quarter you know we're looking
at completely how the future is going to
change how do you talk about structural
change well I think already people had
this problem way back in the late 19th
century and uh the economists uh uh who
began the American economic Association
in the United States were all trained in
Germany and uh they gradually even even
the economic Association became so
narrow that the economists got together
and started a new discipline sociology
and then they thought okay sociology
will talk about everything that's
happening
but then uh just like the University of
Chicago Standard Oil uh took over uh the
economics profession they took over
sociology and now sociology is just
about status you talk about status but
what we're talking about
is transformation of the status
categories a transformation of status
not just how do you compete within a
given uh system to uh get a house so
sociologies in a bad a state as uh
economics archaeology uh got into you
know pretty much the same problem there
wasn't any uh the archaeologists didn't
really talk about economics and
especially the field that I was in for
many years at Harvard uh serology uh uh
didn't let economists come anywhere near
them because they said whenever
economists try to involve us in a
discussion about Sumer Babylonia you
know the the bronze AG they they have
category that are completely
anachronistic and uh they they say
things civilization could not have
started the way that you say it started
because uh that's not what Margaret
Thatcher would have done I mean or
Milton Friedman would have done I'm
obviously exaggerating but that uh I
think the group that I put together I I
was the only Economist in the group that
we put together at Harvard to rewrite
the economic history of the ancient near
East and uh classical antiquity
uh they no room for economists in it
because they didn't they they couldn't
believe that there was such a thing as
debt cancellation that you and I spoke
about in our earlier lecture so you you
have people that don't believe you have
a profession of Economics that can't
believe that economies actually evolved
the way they did over the last 5,000
years or even the last 200 years they
can't imagine what made uh European
industrialization and americ is
industrial takeoff so
successful
uh because if you realize what made
industrial capitalism so revolutionary
and successful then you'd have to say
well is that what's happening today you
have to realize that we're no longer
following that that Well Finance
capitalism is no longer industrial
capitalism we in a whole new world what
do you call it Neo feudalism uh road to
predition
yeah what are you going to call it and
what are you going to call the
discipline that calls that what if you
have a university teaching courses what
are you going to call uh what department
are you going to call it that teaches
these these courses I don't know that's
why uh uh I mean Richard uh had a niche
position in teaching Mar specifically
Marxism uh and I stopped teaching and
went to work for being a government
advisor
uh 50 years ago
because for governments they didn't uh
Wall Street uh had a freedom that I
didn't have an Academia in Academia at
the new school all they cared was uh
what you believed you know are you one
of us uh at Wall Street they didn't care
about my politics uh they came to know
that I was a Marxist they all they cared
about was whether my forecasts were
right or wrong whether I was telling him
what was going to happen and because of
that I became uh you know very
successful ful uh they didn't care about
the ideology that's the difference
between at least Wall Street and uh the
business Community uh was free of the
economic categories that prevented
economists from playing a productive
role in uh the American economy it all
sounds uh ridiculous but uh I mean I
find when I go to China uh I mean they
when they made they made me an honorary
professor in Wuhan which is their
University City with I think million
students and they again I was in a niche
Like Richard was in as a professor at
the school of Economics at the school of
Mark of studies at ping University
uh but I don't uh there's no Department
of colonialism there's no uh Department
in a you call it civilization the
civilization Department I guess you
could call it that maybe you can come up
with a word uh I've very rarely come up
with the titles for any of my books even
though you say that I'm clear in
discussion I'm not clear enough to boil
it all down to a title of my book
someone else always makes a suggestion
for that I'm going to apologize right
now for not pulling out the most no
don't don't you don't need to make that
face I'm going to apologize for not
pulling out the most interesting thing
you said but something that I just found
fascinating and that I need to press you
on oh do I want to know what I said you
said that Paul Krugman does not know
economics and the reason that I this is
interesting everybody says that okay
well let let me let me keep going I'm
not inviting I'm not trying to get you
into a trap uh to Spring and add homm
attack on him or anything I just find it
quite curious that he has held some very
senior positions he's won the Nobel
prize in economics but that he was given
the the prizes for not knowing about
economics so so this that's why that's
what the prize is all about say more
explain more about this how how how this
can be the case and and let before you
go on though let me just say I would
love to have Paul on the show to talk
about his work to hear what he has to
say about all we were together uh as
advisers to uh uh medv uh in Russia and
uh he was uh chairing the committee I
was on uh I most of my friends as it
happened my close colleagues were also
on my side uh uh and uh afterwards we're
all sitting in the dining room uh he
came into the dining room so turned his
bed he literally moved all over went and
sat in a corner and ended up muttering
to himself well without being at H and I
can explain what the problem is uh I
knew uh one of one of my friends was a
Belgian Economist who' gone to school
with him uh and uh he said they had a
conversation once and uh Krugman told
him the one thing you know that tell
don't talk about money he said that's
the one thing it's just going to up
upset people they all have different
ideas you know uh you'll do much better
with your presses if you don't talk
about money he never talked about money
uh he he did get an an argument one he
had uh written debate with Steve Kean U
and it was like Bambi meets Goliath uh
and uh Paul Krugman said banks are
intermediaries are the reason that we
don't treat uh money or debt in the uh
economy is the econom is basically
barter he's written this is what he's
written about the econ it's as if the
economy's barter and money is just the
counters he doesn't realize that and
Steve Keane said money is debt don't you
get it when there's money created it's
the banks create credit did you know
that they actually charge interest on it
and that the other person has a debt to
this money a money on the balance sheet
of the bank uh uh a claim is a debt on
the liability side of the balance sheet
and uh crewman just got a headache he
couldn't he couldn't understand that uh
he said well no it's all it it money is
just a veil uh a veil of money uh
and one person if uh there's a balance
sheet and one person's money asset is
another person's loan creditor claim is
another person's debt then it all
balances out to zero and you don't need
to take that into account in making the
balance sheet for who owes what in the
economy
that that's not Krugman only that's how
you get a
PhD uh and I'll give you another example
when I was how I got my pH Stakes I uh
uh did I ever discuss this with you
before we've discussed it but it was
probably a long time ago and I'm sure
our listeners don't remember if we're
picking up new ones all the time want to
write my PhD at New York University on
concepts of productive and unproductive
Labor uh and I uh and productivity what
is you know productivity in different uh
uh uh measures and concept and I went to
the person who was uh uh teaching uh
something like that from the National
Bureau of economic research it's head
Solomon fabricant he said yeah the same
thing halbruner said completely
unnecessary to discuss it he said you
have to realize my uh Michael that
economics is uh like it's an evolution
and uh there's a survival of the fittest
and uh uh we don't talk about that in
economics anymore today and if we don't
talk about it it means that uh it's not
necessary there there are new ways uh to
do it it's it's uh just not an
interesting topic so I
uh in the middle of this he stopped and
tried to recruit me into the CIA and
Helder yes he said uh you know I can see
you're smart do you want to join the CIA
and he held a report uh he P we've just
done a wonder the CIA had just published
its first public report and it was on
Russia's gold Supply uh saying you know
don't lend money to Russia because it
doesn't have as much gold as you think
here's what we estimate Russia's gold
Supply and I my eyes widened and I said
well I just read a critique of that
report uh one of trac's customers is
Anaconda uh the copper company and an
anaconda bought some bars of gold that
uh Russia was selling and it uh did uh
refined it electrolytically analyzed you
know how much uh copper uh was in it and
they found out that much of this gold of
Russia wasn't dug out of a mine or mined
in a river it was made is a product
Electro electrolytically refining copper
you put copper in a a big electri link
and the gold falls to the bottom and if
you're producing a lot of copper which
Russia needs for electrification for
copper wire copper buildings all things
you make out of copper then you're going
to have gold and that uh Russia's gold
Supply was much greater than the CIA
reported uh because the ca didn't e
explicitly they couldn't have been so
dumb that they didn't know that uh
copper production was uh a gold when I
did an analysis of Chile's copper
industry Chile has in its balance of
payments here's H what we produce in
Copper here's how much gold we produce
Chile does not have uh Rivers gold it's
all copper production well needless to
say uh uh fabricant decide he he
actually said to the whole class he
wasn't focusing on me he told the whole
class the CIA needs Economist uh this is
crazy I don't think anybody responded uh
as a way the what a wonderful name
fabricant for fabrication so I didn't
write my dissertation on concepts of
productivity uh I talked to a friend of
mine a German socialist who never uh was
able to who Gart Brie who was uh he fled
Germany and when it was Nazi but could
never say the word socialism uh but I I
said why don't I write on something
uncontroversial like uh the first big
American Economist Routh pasine Smith
and he said that's good nobody can
disagree with that uh so I that's how I
wrote a uncontroversial uh PhD thesis
and had no problem getting other PhD
though although it wasn't about any of
the economic ideas that I was actually
using to analyze why some economies were
evolving and becoming more uh productive
and uh prosperous when other countries
weren't well if you don't have a concept
of productivity then how do you know
whether your policy is productive or not
uh and if you say there's no such thing
as productivity it's productivities
making money productivity Whoever has
the highest income your income per mano
is in each country is a measure of your
productivity so what more do you need to
know well of course uh how do you make
that income uh do you make it by being
productive or by being predatory and
unproductive uh uh that whole issue
comes up and uh that was not uh I guess
what fabricant uh uh and the CIA didn't
want any discussion of with what's
productive what isn't are uh is our
uh allocation of savings uh and credit
created by Wall Street helping the
economy being more productive and
prosperous or not that's the one thing
they don't want to talk about uh and if
you talked about it then it turns out
not to be so productive and uh you
realize that uh other uh you realize why
China's going ahead and America
hasn't all right we actually did a
little pause for a snack and I want to
tell you about the snack that I I'm
giving you right now so
it's I think something like a hundred
years ago I might get the details wrong
that's not 100 years old don't worry the
emperor of Japan gave a gift of 10 Axis
deer it's a a type of deer yeah to the
king of
Hawaii he released them onto
Maui and these 10 or so deer turn into
thousands upon thousands they're an
invasive species they're now on other
islands like
Leni and they
are causing serious damage to the
landscape so these deer were just being
cold so they were being killed somewhat
to my mind absolutely
senselessly I would prefer it if they
could somehow be H lifted to wherever
they came from where their ancestors are
from but that's not going to happen
happened this company Maui Nei venison
they got a contract from the government
to humanely in so much as this is
possible manage the landscape manage the
deer and sell the meat so that some
benefit is coming from killing them so
it's the only meat that I eat actually
this deer and they're not paying me or
anything like that but I really believe
in what they're doing so I'm glad I have
an opportunity to tell you about it
while you're eaing it soil and green is
people uh the I wanted to follow up on
that question about Paul Krugman before
we get back to Marks and the question
though is just what is it that has
happened in your perspective to the
discipline or profession of Economics
that somebody who you do not believe
knows economics receives the Nobel Prize
this isn't a question some much about
Paul it's a question just about
economics today in
general I don't know what they can where
they can do they not reading an
economics textbook I haven't uh read an
economics article in American Economic
Review or any of the other
uh
prge uh journals for maybe 40 years I
mean I read it and it's just all
mathematics and it's just what's the
point there there's nothing it's
about what economists do and all they
can they make regression equations
meaning mathematical projections of
Trends uh without asking what are the
interaction between these Trends and the
rest of society will the trend continue
they just say well we have uh all sorts
of mathematical curves there's an
exponential curve there's a straight
line curve there's a two three degree
curve where it uh turns into an S curve
they just try to fit the trend and
project
and that's what they do or they do
correlation analysis that that's what uh
money's made on Wall Street they
correlate stock prices against relative
to other bond prices or other PR prices
and they make uh uh derivative trades it
it's it's all on mathemat on you know
somehow trading back and forth it's not
about how the economy Works uh the math
if you see a lot of mathematics you know
it's really uh taking the in current
environment for granted where is it
going and uh a statistical analysis of
probability will not work if the
environment changes mathematically it
has to be an unchanging environment for
the uh curve that you're projecting to
make any sense and that means that they
don't want to talk about how is society
changing because if you do that then the
mathematical projection that you're
making uh doesn't really work well
economy you no longer uh re talk about
how the uh context may work than if
you're the military and uh what do we do
if we lose what do we do if a Russia
fights back when we move our army into
Ukraine uh what do we do if uh China
decides not to export to us if uh we
raise the tariffs on it and say that
it's our number one enemy you know what
do we do if other countries respond
that's not what it's all about and so
the people who do study the laws of
motion well are they study colonialism
or
imperialism uh I have one show on the
Internet geopolitical or we call it
geopolitics because that doesn't seem to
be ideological at all it's just
geopolitics uh that's one way of calling
it I don't know what else uh we can call
it but it means something you have uh a
big uh possibility of uh moving
within within a dynamic of change and
the laws of motion economics doesn't
describe the laws of motion if if
nothing changes and the economy stays
just the way it is what's going to
happen well is that really forecasting
that's not futurism uh and the the sort
of uh Heyday of futurism in the 1970s
early 880s there was a a Futures
Institute that uh hired me to project
what happens if uh people live longer
how will that affect social security how
will that affect the economy they don't
do analysis they don't get contracts
like this anymore it's a how how can we
make sure that the economy stays exactly
the same so there isn't any change how
can we prevent change from occurring not
how can we look at the laws of motion
now that I'm thinking about our
background I think I can answer the
question of why can I speak clearly oh
Richard and I were on the outside of
society looking in once we became Mar if
you're looking at Society from the
outside uh and uh ethnic minorities
usually have that example even and even
though I'm not an ethnic minority uh you
you're looking at from the outside you
can see the whole shape of the bottle
but if you're inside the bottle uh
you're the majority then you just take
everything for granted and uh you want
it to go on forever and you don't want
it to change so I think that being an
outsider really helps talk very simply
because you can see the big bottle you
can see the shape you can
see the big structure well
Michael I think we started our episode
with some dessert hearing about you
hearing about Rick hearing about your
backgrounds but I'd like to have some
vegetables now and and what I have in
mind since you probably have no idea
what I'm talking about is in the
beginning of the conversation you and
Rick referenced dos Capital volume three
and I think it would be or if there is a
surplus value volume three that's just
as important you got to read theories of
surplus value along with capital uh
Engles edited Capital after markx died
but after Engles died Carl kotsky took
Marx's original manuscript for as which
was the history of economic thought and
originally marks had planned that to be
the first volume of capital he ended up
abbreviating it in critique of political
economy uh or introduction to the
critique of political
economy uh and so uh the C the uh theory
of surplus value has an elaboration of
all of the ideas that were edited by
angles into volume three of Capital they
both worked from the same manuscript
where I was going with this is you
mentioned volume 3 but I think it would
be nice to have in one place just your
thoughts on volumes one two and three
and I'm not asking for uh this really
elaborate lecture like you gave on
Chinese tariffs unless you want to give
one but I just have in mind that was
elaborate I thought that's
just yeah no but I just am wondering
for our listeners who haven't read dos
copal what how are these three volumes
structured what do you get out of them
and how might they be useful for us
today well by the time Marx
wrote uh I decided to write uh Capital
there was already a very sophisticated
analysis of land rent uh the debate
between Ricardo and malus for instance
in which is volume two of uh Ricardo's
collected works is a wonderful
back and forth discussion about what is
land rent what is economic rent volume
one was of course Ricardo's principles
of political economy uh where the the
fir the second chapter was all about
land rent so Marx didn't have to write a
book about what was
already uh written about how capitalism
was freeing economies from the residue
of feudalism to become
something Revolution AR and entirely new
uh he did plan as I said he planned to
write uh that as a leadin uh when the
theory the Surplus value was going to be
volume one instead it ended up being
called volume four because by that time
the early three volumes were already
translated well
uh so Marx knew that he wanted to write
something new while other people were
discussing exploitation
that was unproductive Marx wanted to uh
say that well there we've talked about
landlords being produ uh being
exploitative and monopolists and bankers
what about industrialists how ises that
well that's when he said there are two
ways of looking at Labor we discussed
earlier here there's what the employer
has to pay the labor for the cost of
production and then what the employer
call sells the product of labor for that
markup is the Surplus
value and Mark said well of course by
selling a labor for more than you pay it
that's productive but that the C unlike
the roner the rent recipient who uh does
not play a productive role at all the
capitalist plays a productive role
because he organizes production he or he
develops a market he uh develops a
supply of all of the raw materials and
the intermediate Goods that are all made
by labor that go into this product uh
and uh so uh the profits that a
capitalist make is part of value uh uh
the uh capitalist profit is not a form
of economic rent unlike the kinds of
economic rent that uh people before me
have all been discussing Adam Smith and
John Stewart Mill and Ricardo and malus
and he he goes in there are many he goes
into the whole long discussion of this I
I wanted to discuss how uh the
capitalist industrial capitalist
exploitation is different from the pre
capitalist feudal forms of exploitation
and uh so naturally if you're going to
write a book about how the economy works
you begin by saying here's what I'm
adding to the discussion that I know
that all you people are already familiar
with who've read The Wealth of Nations
by Adam Smith principles of political
economy by Mark's principles of
political economy and their application
to social Philosophy by John Stewart
Mill we know you've already read that
but I'm going to I'm going to just say
how the idea of industrial capitalist uh
profits uh came into being by
essentially out of feudalism it took
essentially uh the uh you displaced uh
the surf on the land uh and the tency on
the land you drove it into the city
where the surf who was exploited under
feudalism by uh the feudal Lord uh who
would sell the uh the crop for more than
they had to pay the Surfs uh well now uh
you you drive labor into the cities and
the labor has to find a job uh and uh at
first the labor would uh essentially
work in an elaborate way of how they did
on the land they'd work at home the home
spun is what they used to call texti
they work as textile lead workers but
then industrial
capitalism made was different from
earlier forms because it was industrial
it used manufacturing it used uh econ
power driven looms power-driven uh
Machinery so it's uh the Machinery that
grad that greatly uh uh replaced the
labor services with uh much more energy
per worker you you could trace the
growth in GDP or national income for the
last 200 years in energy use per worker
and say that uh but and it's the
capitalist that uh that created uh this
energy uh per worker and used it to make
products that there was a market for
that the capitalist had to develop by uh
developing a whole distribution network
with other capitalists uh businessmen
creating the distribution Network for
all of this stores railroads and
everything else uh that's needed so Mark
is talking about what made capitalism
different from feudalism uh and why
capitalism uh once you created uh this
uh uh in ability to make a profit by
selling the products of Labor you wanted
to pay labor as little as possible well
uh Ricardo uh and other people use the
term the iron wage theory of Labor that
uh labor needed enough money the basic
price of subsistence uh and that price
of subsistence was was the basis well
how are you uh you can't uh have a fight
of employers against labor by paying
them less than it cost to live because
then there won't be anyone living to
employ anymore so you had to do that so
the question to the capitalist is how do
we Lo get rid of all of the cost of
production of Labor uh wages that are
unnecessary the false cost of production
well you get rid of the landlord class
you get rid of the monopolists uh you
you don't let Bank you make Banks make
productive loans uh uh for uh capital
for industrial capitalist purposes not
just take over loans not just to make
War uh IND the banking developed in the
12th century is war financing uh that
and that was basically what drove uh the
structure of the Financial system from
the 12th century uh all the way down to
the 17th century when you had nation
states fiscal States developing uh and
it it was still a financialized economy
until industrial capitalism came came
along so uh volume one was about
uh the uh the layer of uh that had
become the root layer of industrial
capitalism is the employment of Labor by
industry but Mark said of course uh
we're dealing with a multi-layered
society there's a layer of landlords and
rent recipients how will you deal with
that how will you deal with uh natural
resource rent Ricardo had in a chapter
two he said after land rent the same
rules and definitions apply to natural
resource rent how do you deal with the
financial sector how do you deal with
the government sector well as I we
discussed earlier in this talk the uh
the government sector was to make uh
basic infrastructure costs instead of
letting uh the post office be
monopolized uh as it was
under banking families started to
develop uh the post office for instance
and uh the taxi service what you called
a taxi getting here was named after the
Turnin taxes family uh a banking family
a financial family of Europe uh all of
this was going to be uh provided by the
government if the government can provide
railroads uh in Europe many of these
sectors were government uh run from the
beginning the railroads unlike America
were public developments very largely
the the uh broadcasting the BBC was a
government company company not a private
not NBC or ABC uh in America uh you had
all sorts of sectors Public Health uh
and this was by the conservative
industrialist party that was advocating
this not by uh anti- capitalist it was I
think we discussed before how Benjamin
Disraeli said Health all is Health we
have to have government health because
healthy labor is more productive and uh
the American School uh of Economist said
actually uh the it is in the cap of
course capitalists want to pay labor as
little as possible to get the markup but
they actually make more of a profit by
uh paying labor in general more because
uh well housed labor wellp paid labor
well-fed labor well clothed labor is
more productive labor you can't have
popper labor you can't have people like
today you have workers sleeping in their
car because they can't afford a house
that's not a way to get a productive
Labor uh and so uh the the individual
capitalist wanted to pay the individ ual
labor force as little as possible to
make a a profit but uh the capitalist
class wanted all of Labor's uh living
standards to rise as much as possible as
long as uh Rising living standards made
labor more productive making more money
for the capitalist so uh markx wasn't
just saying well it's not like you take
wages is a universal given you have to
realize that there's a wage
productivity advantage Ag and as you
produce more Machinery uh you're going
to require more skilled labor for it
you're going to change the character of
Labor uh from the sort of Mind dulling
repetitive tasks to a higher tasks
you're going to want Machinery to take
over the most uh mind dulling repetitive
tasks uh for that and uh capitalism will
in its own attempt to make more profits
as an economic system it's going to
raise the cost
uh is going to raise the uh living the
cost of Labor uh to uh the capitalist
but that cost can be reduced to the
extent that the government picks up all
of what's now called the external costs
the costs that are uh the the government
that are Universal and you don't want to
be privatized like what we mentioned the
Transportation uh the key uh the key
infrastructure cost you don't want to be
privatized so Marx is discussing how how
it is that the industrial capitalist can
make the most money from employing Labor
uh and he was an optimist he thought all
of this is going to lead forward by he
said the role of industrial capitalism
is to free economies from the legacy of
rent seeking
feudalism as we said again and again uh
we want to bring prices in line with
cost value get rid of uh uh get rid of
the economic run so so uh the first
volume was just talking about uh labor
Capital relations and then he said but
that's only part of the economy volume
two was largely about the development of
rent Theory how uh the conditions of
landlord had been transformed by
capitalism that uh in effect Mark said
Industries uh agriculture is going to be
industrialized the management of farming
the management of uh agriculture is
going to be U the man M of industrial
capitalism cost accounting to minimize
the costs that are not necessary for
production so uh agriculture under
industrial capitalism will be different
from surom and agriculture under
feudalism uh he said the same thing for
banking uh in the third first of all the
the big fight of the the biggest fight
of the 19th century was to get rid of
the landlords they were what was holding
the econ back by raking off all the
Surplus in the form of will uh you have
to eat and if we can the Corn Laws a big
fight that led to Ricardo's writing as
principles of political economy and
Taxation were uh the tariffs on uh grain
uh the Corn Laws that uh wanted to
prevent England from uh importing cheap
grain that would have lowered the uh
landowners uh Farm rents and so the
basically the fight of Ricardo was do we
really want the economy to be run for
the benefit of landlords to get higher f
farm rents by charging higher prices of
food that are going to make our labor so
high priced that uh instead of making
Britain the workshop of the world uh
Britain will price itself out of a world
industry you've got to you've got to get
rid of the power of the landlord class
that led for parliamentary reform to uh
get rid of the power of the House of
Lords meaning the house of landlords
basically and which ultimately led to a
the Constitutional crisis in 1909 in 10
that was resolved by saying the House of
Lords could never again uh repeal or
reject a uh proposal by the House of
Commons so markx essentially just said
what he was doing was new and then he
was elaborating now that I've said what
no let's talk about what we know that
we're dealing with land and rent how is
capitalism going to change rent and then
he talked about how is capitalism going
to industrialize banking just like
capitalism is revolutionized agriculture
capitalism is going to run uh banking uh
in a way that is part of the industrial
process not only War lending not only
lending uh to make money for Monopoly
uh extract make money on foreign
investments like the Panama Canal or the
sez Canal or make money on uh foreign
colonization uh but as part of uh how do
we make it uh foreign colonization was
all part of rent seeking so while uh
Europe was uh freeing its economies for
rent its colonization process created
all imposed economic rent on all the
colonies so you had the division of the
world into the roner economies in uh uh
abroad and the industrial economies uh
in uh in uh Western England Germany and
America so already you had this
bifurcated World economy that were
seeing today between the bricks uh and
uh the uh the West the neoliberal you
already you had this this fight the
seeds of all the fight today were
planted in this bifurcated economy that
Industrial capitalism caused by making
England and uh other industrial
countries the workshop of the world and
that meant other countries had to be the
raw materials suppliers of the world
that were supplying uh all of these uh
and uh and uh the last thing that uh
England wanted was for its colonies to
follow what it did at home to have a
land tax to tax economic rent the land
rent and the the mineral rent uh to
invest in their own industry they were
prevented from making their own industry
uh actively so uh this result of
colonialism and uh the uh the rentree
economy and the industrial economy so
the rentree ideology at least and the
proner economy uh created in uh the raw
material suppliers of the world is
what's created the world indebtedness
today by the global South and by the
global majority leading to dollarization
well if these countries uh if the bricks
had studied this uh what made industrial
capitalism so different from the rent
extraction if they'd studied really uh
the colonialism not only how did Europe
oppress us but what made Europe's
oppression from us stultifying our
development so different from what
industrial capitalism did to make
western and America the industrial
center of the world then they'd know why
don't we do what industrial capitalism
idealized create a rent-free economy
where there is no ronier class to
exploit us especially a foreign owned
ronier class well all this discussion
about foreign debt this was all
discussed in the late 18th century James
Stewart who wrote uh the generation
before Adam Smith discussed it uh all
sorts of people uh discussed it this was
normal discussion in the mercantilist
literature uh that also mercantilism
also was not taught in the economic
curriculum and economic history is not
taught in the economic curriculum so uh
how are you going to have uh
a educational agenda for the bricks
countries to teach them how the world
works if you don't have economic history
uh either of industrial capitalism or
mercantilism before if you don't have
the history of economic thought uh but
you only teach them mathematics when
they get here to project economic curves
without analyzing the environment how
are how are the bricks going to have
some means of uh guidance unless they
reinvent the wheel U but and how can
they reinvent the wheel if they don't
make a distinction between economic rent
and profits and uh productive and
unproductive uh investment
they don't even have these Concepts
because they're called Unthinkable
Concepts and if you discuss them uh
you're not promoted in the economics
profession so that none of the modern
monetary Theory graduates of uh you know
that uh my group comes from uh are their
papers are not accepted in the
respectable economic journals and if a
university is going to hire new
professors they judge well how many
articles do you have in the professional
journals well if if you don't agree with
the tunnel visioned uh money doesn't
count uh debt doesn't count uh school
then uh you're not going to have your
articles published and you don't get
hired so this is the blind we're in a
blind alley uh that the economy is going
into and unfortunately the uh Global
majority countries Asia Africa Latin
America who and China have sent all
their Prestige students here uh to share
in this to be Tau this tunnel
vision are there any serious
misconceptions about
Marxism that we haven't touched on yet
today that you think are important in
understanding today's economy yes the
big big misconception is that Marx is
what he wrote in volume one of capital
and it's all about uh employer Labor
Relations uh and uh that uh uh
everything else uh is outside of Marxism
that Volume 2 and volume 3 don't have
anything to do with Marxism that finance
and rent don't have anything to do with
Marxism uh and uh the economy is not an
economic system uh all that Marxism
talks about is labor Capital relations
and you need a big state for that uh and
the state becomes the employer of Labor
that's uh the trivialization of uh
capitalism that I encountered at the new
school uh when I was teaching there it
changed a bit uh since then which is why
uh Richard can I guess be an adjunct uh
there teaching part the time but they
they don't have enough uh money to hire
full professors at the new school
because their graduates don't get many
jobs uh teaching what they learn at the
new school uh so they have to uh they're
in a budget squeeze uh yeah that that's
basically the uh the problem
uh say the question once again what the
misinterpretation of Marxism we already
said think Marxism is the big state
Marxism is stalinism Marxism is why
Russia didn't develop and they ended up
having to have
neoliberalism uh destroy more more
Russian lives than World War II
destroyed that that's the alternative to
Marxism uh which proves that Marxism
doesn't work because Marxism is like a
World War II and it's destructive effect
on stalinist Russia the and the the fact
is that if they the Russians would have
UND
volumes 2 and three they would have
known what was in store for them uh when
they let the American neoliberals take
over Marxism is is as I said before
there are two approaches to Marx one is
to start with biography of Marx work
forward and move uh segue quite quickly
into Russia and uh why stalinism failed
uh and the other is to look at marks as
the culmination of a classical economics
uh including all of the critique of
economic rent that went before him the
culmination of Adam Smith and Ricardo
and John seart Mill and all the other
familiar names I could go I could have
said a lot of names that are not
familiar uh that would have been in
there uh but so uh if you're talking
about Marxism as really a study of the
laws of motion of uh modern capitalist
Society uh not only labor and capital
but uh uh landlordism prop the property
relations a financial relation that fin
property uh uh industry and employment
and the role of government
infrastructure are all different layers
of the economy and uh you have to look
at the big picture and not all of a
sudden use Marxism as uh a kind of
tunnel vision of its own only looking at
what Marx wrote in volume one of capital
uh I I think I
mentioned as I was a kid my father would
take me to uh our uh
are his friends and I think I mentioned
before they all had the three volumes of
capital on their shelf the Charles Kerr
Edition that red uh and you know I'd
sort of be a little bored while they're
watching the football games or whatever
uh and I'd look through the volumes and
I noticed volumes two and three had
never been opened they were all tightly
bound volume one was open this s me to
the beginning and uh I realized that
most people who call themselves Marxist
didn't really read
marks well
that is a great note on which to end
what is certainly going to be one of the
most memorable of the 260 or so
interviews I've ever done this has been
a very intense weekend for a number of
different reasons uh a lot of things
came together to make this happen as our
viewers will have noticed this has been
a pretty crazy setup and interview but
thank you so much Michael also obvious
VI L thanks to Rick who's no longer here
but this has just been great so thanks
so much for doing this with me well
you've shown me a new site in a park
that's right across the street a block
from where I live and I haven't ever
been here before in the 25 years that
I've lived here I've always gone the
other direction the part I would have
found this place is is invisible you've
made something visible to me that isn't
and I now I know what other people find
how they feel when they discover Marxism
[Music]
