hi everybody today is Thursday April 17
2025 and our friend Richard Wolff is back
with us welcome back Professor
thank you very much Nima glad to be here
let's get started with what's going on
between the United States
and China and these escalations and
somehow economic war between the two
parties here is what the Chinese expert
Viktor G said about the way that China
is going to respond to the United
States fight to the end as the
government has uh declared and China has
now imposed the retaliatory tariff up to
125% against all US exports to China now
if things are not handled well this
means complete stop of China US trade
both way no goods exported from the
United States to China and complete stop
of everything made in China to the
United States this is decoupling if the
United States wants to really welcome
this China will reciprocate and causing
the breakup of China US relations
whether this will evolve from peace to
war well let's all be prepared in
essence what China now declares is that
it is prepared to fight to the end trade
war tariff war technology war or real
war so the ball is in Trump's court you
decide and I will reciprocate i will
never succumb to the US pressure and
this is the moment of truth china wants
to defend free trade the United States
wants to destroy free trade the rest of
the world is watching and there will be
a choice by the end of the day for China
you cannot hold a gun to China's head
and issue automaton and demand all the
impossibilities for example and ask
China to swallow that china is the
country that values dignity and decency
and all more than economic gains or
economic losses
richard you see the tone and the way
that they're responding to the United
States how deep are
[Music]
they going after this sort of economic
war
well as we have talked about on many
occasions on your program you me Michael
Hudson and so on there is a changing in
the world economy that we are part of
that we are living through the United
States is living through it China is
living through it everybody is living
through it it is a fundamental change
above all because one empire that of the
United States the absolute dominant
uniolar moment as it has been called by
professor Mir Shimemer and others uh is
passing the United States had its empire
it lasted excuse me about a hundred
years it came after the decline of the
British Empire so that the pound
sterling once was the global currency
then it it was the dollar that was the
global currency after World War II as we
have talked about the United States was
the
overwhelmingly dominant economic power
that was left standing after the
horrible mutual destruction of everybody
else who might have been an
empire world War II finished the British
Empire it finished the French the German
aspirations which had already been
destroyed in World War I the Japanese
they were
destroyed the symbolism at the end of
the United States almost a monopolist in
the mil in the atom bomb dropping it on
on Japan i mean there you have we are
dominant you are
defeated okay now for the rest of the
20th century from the
1940s to the end of the century and even
into the early years of the current
century the United States played that
role of course it welcomed free trade
because it was in the best position to
take advantage of free trade they didn't
want barriers anywhere they wanted open
competition because between their
economic power their political power
their ideological power and their
military power who was going to do as
well as they were in a global market so
they had wonderful ideas the profit and
richness of American capitalism would
now expand to take the whole world and
that's how they thought and the people
who lead the United States today whether
they are Democrats or Republicans are
people who've lived their whole adult
life from childhood through the
universities or colleges schooling into
their political power position with the
United States as dominant
you must understand that to grasp the
difficulty for them when it turns out
that their expectation their hope their
assumption that this would last
forever comes to a screeching halt when
suddenly somebody else is
rising it's as if the country here
forgot its own history it was a small
poor corner of the British Empire here
in North
America and it became the child that not
only outgrew the parent but subordinated
the parent britain is now the the the
poor corner of the American Empire not
America the poor corner of the British
Empire and now China China emerges what
was it a very poor corner of the British
and American
empires abusively treated by both of
them and now through a whole host of
spectacular adjustments that the Chinese
made to their impoverished
situation they found a way to grow their
economy faster than Britain ever did
faster than the United States ever did
and in a literally in 40 years they
become what the powerhouse that they are
today and they have been very very
successful at doing it and let's be
clear before I explain what this means
the Chinese are not
only an immense economy now but they
they had a particular strategy and that
strategy was to become the lowcost high
quality manufacturing ing center of the
whole global economy taking advantage of
the globalization that the United States
organized as its market as its framework
and then to become successful by
producing the same goods and services
that the West was producing but of a
better quality and a lower price often
both as in for example solar panels or
as in AI or as in electric vehicles all
of which they now produce the best
quality in the world at the lowest price
they succeeded in doing it and it isn't
all that difficult japan earlier did
something quite similar they went to
work for example to to defeat the west
that had o overwhelmed Japan by
producing the
automobile more cheaply and of a better
quality to take that area that niche and
it's not only that but that was a
particular focus of the Japanese and
they built an economy out of it they
built a place for themselves in the
world economy the Chinese have done it
they're a much bigger country than Japan
they have much bigger history and you
know all of that so they went to work
and they have now done that and so the
question is they have arrived and they
want their economy to grow they have
lifted seven or 800 million people out
of poverty in the last few years
uh they are therefore better at what
well they're better at what they have
organized themselves to be they
understand partly it's their Marxism and
their communism but partly it's it's
it's ancient Chinese philosophy too they
are aware that one of the weaknesses of
western
capitalism is its inequality in the way
that it has you know Elon Musk and and
then the 50 million people who can't get
through next week in the United States
what is they understand that that is
socially
unsustainable it is socially
destabilizing to organize your economy
so they're not going to do that and they
have the government power because of the
Communist Party and the way their
government is structured they have this
hybrid economy half state enterprises
half private enterprises and they can
use the power of the state to mediate to
control these two parts with an end
result that is much more efficient
that's the sad truth of it then western
capitalism privately owned that's
they've shown that there's not a debate
anymore except for idologues who don't
want to see what they have accomplished
and what they are continuing to
accomplish and one more crucial thing
they understood as a late comer to the
world of modern
industrialization that they better have
real
serious
allies not merely transa but they needed
to build on what they could find to give
them a community of allied nations in a
world of nation building and nation
mentality they had to come up with some
kind of
genuine
internationalism and the way they did
that brilliant in my judgment is they
positioned
themselves as a
member duespaying member of the global
south they positioned themselves as part
of that world which European American
and Japanese
colonialism had
repressed and what that did is enable
them particularly in the last 10 years
to develop the
bricks and that is
crucial it's not just the original
bricks you know South Africa Russia
India Brazil and
China but the but the 15 are roughly
more countries that have joined on one
capacity or another partner or member of
the bricks it is so important right now
because the United
States is decoupling from China and
let's be real clear it's the United
States that took the initiative to do
this the United States broke the United
States imposed tariffs first when the
Chinese retaliate retaliated they almost
always retaliated very carefully less
than the United States so if the United
States is
145% they stop at 125 that's very
symbolic but it is very smart because it
teaches the whole world the cause of
this whole problem is the United States
it makes the interventions first but the
problem of the United States given its
situation in its
desperation to survive what it takes to
be the terrible decline of its empire it
is sacrificing its
alliances because it it it is so
frightened it is so desperate in its
situation that even to its border Canada
and Mexico it becomes aggressive it
becomes angry it becomes grabbing it
would take me Canada take Mexico's this
or extraordinary but look at the
difference the United States alienating
Canada Mexico Europe whereas the Chinese
are building the bricks you could not
have a more
dramatic
differentiation but now let's really
hone in on
it China will res react to the
decoupling with the United States by
doing what Russia did when the United
States became the support for the
Ukrainians what Russia did was turn to
the bricks and it saved them it meant
that the economic sanctions of the West
did not work they failed they were
supposed to bring Russia to its knees
they were supposed to collapse the ruble
the ruble by the way right now is one of
the most uh rapidly rising currencies in
the whole world the last few
months so the bricks saved Russia the
bricks are now going to save China why
because the bricks is over half the
population of this planet somewhere 50
to 60% of the people of this world live
in a bricks member country china will
now turn to them what it can't sell here
it will sell there what it can't buy
from the United States it will buy from
and we're talking about every continent
every part of the
world whose alliances were strengthened
by Russia during the Ukraine war just in
time for
China who was supportive of Russia
during the Ukraine war to turn around
and get support from Russia in return
which as far as I can tell will be
forthcoming for them
and that's very very important and the
United States that's 4 and a.5% of the
world's people not 50 to 60% 4 and a
half% with less going for its allies the
Europeans are not going to be in a very
good mood to help Americans they are
bitter at what is being purchased at
their expense the United States making
all kinds of plans that leave the
Europeans high and dry including the
tariffs and all of that so you
you're looking at a situation which of
course because in the United States one
is not allowed in general to be honest
about what's going on we live in a
highly politically polarized
society and we have a long history of
not wanting to
acknowledge the empire that we sit
on so this is difficult for Americans to
learn about to understand to see in any
way the Chinese are positioned now with
a kind of automatic demonization
i want to remind everyone when you hear
all the noise that we're now going to
hear about the evil Chinese just
remember it wasn't just a few months ago
that Mr putin was the worst imaginable
leader on earth he was a Stalin our
president referred to him as a thug you
know a
criminal what in the world are you doing
and before that it was Saddam Hussein
and before that it was Muhammad Gaddafi
and one monster after we are the
wonderful Democrats surrounded by the
evil monsters and the dictator
extraordinary you live in a country that
lives
almost in a
medieval bifurcation of good and evil
and everything is reduced to that story
and that I wouldn't mind that i mean
that's that would be a cultural
peculiarity except it is leading us to
make one mistake after
another let me end on that
point the war in Ukraine I'm going to
exaggerate a bit but not by much the war
in Ukraine was
lost because the United States thought
that the mother of all
sanctions by Europe and the United
States together focused on Russia would
destroy Russia there were even thoughts
it would break up mr putin would be
thrown out it would dissolve into little
countries that could then be picked off
by NATO the way Eastern Europe was over
the last 20
years that failed totally why because
Russia had the
bricks the current policy with China
will fail for the exact same reason
america does the leaders in America
can't get their heads around the fact
that they have been
outmaneuvered
outgrown the Chinese found a way for
economic development the Chinese found a
way to do what every poor country in
Asia Africa and Latin America wants to
do economic growth quickly so they
aren't so poor anymore the Chinese did
it better faster than anybody else has
ever done it so of course they are the
leader there what would you
expect and no one's going to change that
the United States
cannot
imaginarily do away with what I just
said and the power of that across this
planet is
overwhelming and if you don't take it
into account you
misunderstand the situation you face and
you're going to make strategic mistakes
the sanctions war against Russia failed
it gave Russia the time and the space to
mobilize its military and to win the
military war on the ground in Ukraine
which they have done and the decoupling
strategy which is the same or tariffs
tariffs is another way of whacking the
world just like sanctions is a way of
whacking the world what you are doing
the irony of ironies you're bringing
Russia and China closer together you did
that through the war in Ukraine you're
about to do it again you're making the
same mistake you're not learning that
you have a problem here and that problem
isn't going to go away look Britain as I
think I've mentioned on this show
Britain tried to prevent the United
States even though it was in those days
a poor corner of the British Empire they
didn't want it to break away so they
went to war 1776 they went to war they
lost they didn't
understand a few years later in 1812
they did it again and they lost again
after two wars two losers two
loss they didn't do it
anymore we don't have that luxury
because of nuclear weapons we can't go
through two wars with China to figure
out what I just said we actually have to
do it by thinking where we've been in
the past what it meant how it worked out
what our latest misadventure in Ukraine
this is not a winnable situation for the
mentality of the 20th century the 20th
century is over and the American empire
is over with
it we are not a nation of 4 and a half%
of the people of this planet we are not
in a position to overwhelm the bricks
with 50 to 60% of the world's people and
two or more nuclear powers among them
and up I mean this becomes
lunatic that's not where we're going in
the world we're not doing that the
global south will not sit there and
permit this to happen and all the
military power in the world will not
change
that the the reality is what it is and
only foolish people or crazy people
persist in doing what isn't
working i hate to be so strong about it
but it is the reality and it means that
this noise with China is really a waste
of everybody's
time the prospects for China among the
bricks in maintaining growth are much
better than the prospects of the United
States without its
allies somehow m That's a kind of
megalomania that thinks like
that and if you go too far you will do
enough damage that it will be very
difficult to come back from that
situation i'll tell you the story if I
can of of one example and string it out
so you can see the
implications the BYD corporation uh
build your dream I believe is what BYD
stands for the BYYD Corporation is a
Chinese corporation that makes electric
vehicles cars and
trucks and it makes what is globally
recognized to be the highest quality at
the lowest price they recently got even
more famous because they produced a
battery for their electric vehicles that
takes five minutes to charge which none
of the existing batteries can go that
quickly that takes it takes about as
much time as filling up your car with
gasoline has been taking with that kind
which was one of the big problems of
that industry
it it has so successful that it is now a
larger
uh seller of vehicles than Tesla which
was the first in the electric car area
tesla is
now
shrinking the stock price is falling mr
musk will have to live with a little
less
than400 billion dollar assets to his
name byd is emerging now what does that
mean well obviously it means that in the
competition among all the car companies
in the world to develop the best
cheapest highest quality electric car
the Chinese came in number one that's
already a very remarkable
story but that's only the beginning
that's what I mean by stringing it out
for you now here what's going to happen
the United
States reacting to what the Chinese have
achieved not by figuring out how can we
learn what they did how can we replicate
what they achieved no no no first Mr
trump and then Mr biden put an enormous
tariff many Americans don't seem to know
that there's a tariff of 100% that has
been in effect already before Mr trump
became president again mr biden raised
Trump's tariff of 27 a 12% all the way
up to 100% that means that no BYD cars
come into the United States if you
travel this country as I do you will not
see a BYD vehicle but if you travel the
roads of Europe you will of Asia Africa
America and South America you
will because they are the best vehicle
if you're if you have a taxi company
you're going to buy that car because
that's your best source of input if
you're a a company that uses trucks for
anything you will be buying the best
truck at the lowest price which is
BYD american companies competing with
people in every other part of the world
will not be able to buy the cheapest
best truck they'll have to do with a
more expensive less good vehicle you
know what that means that means all
American companies based here are put at
a
disadvantage in the world market because
they have a much more expensive vehicles
they have to buy of a lower quality than
all their competitors elsewhere in the
world do you understand that is damaging
the economic future of the United States
and
privileging the economic future of all
our competitors abroad especially the
Chinese so that this
tariff backfires on the United States it
doesn't achieve even what it sets out to
achieve it doesn't protect the United
States economy in the long run it
undermines
it look this is not advanced rocket
science this is what economics has
learned over the years tariffs are not a
new phenomena they've been in existence
used by countries for hundreds of years
if you go to any library and you look up
tariff there'll be hundreds of books and
thousands of articles
examining what tariff was used in this
situation how did it work did it succeed
did it fail if it failed why did it we
know all that if you teach a course in
international trade you teach about
tariffs among other topics
doing what we're doing now and having
the president who clearly never took an
economics course or if he did doesn't
remember what he
learned to have him tell you I'm doing a
tariff and it'll have this effect is
ludicrous nobody can do that he can't i
can't a tariff the effect of a tariff
depends on everything else going on in
the environment when you do that
therefore to do it always involves a big
fat risk that it could go this way or
that way and I can give you examples of
when it went this way and when it went
that way you don't
know mr trump acts like he knows maybe
he thinks that's what a president should
do pretend to know what he couldn't
possibly know but for the rest of us
watching this is
craziness now is it possible that the
tariffs will have the effect Mr trump
wants yes it's not a zero probability
sometimes tariffs do what clearly Mr
trump hopes they will do but that's all
he's got a hope
the idea that he has masterfully that's
silly that's just silly meanwhile the
risk he has
taken every country in the
world is
hurt because it almost every country
exports stuff to the United States
because we've been the one of the
richest countries on earth for 50 years
so every country sooner or later the
producers in every other country find a
market here in the United States so he
has just hurt all of them in one act he
made life difficult for every exporting
company and country in the
world those people don't like the United
States more because we did that they
don't like Mr trump more because he did
that not at all they are angry they are
bitter their economic situation has now
been
damaged every leader of every country in
the world now has an invitation to blame
the economic difficulties of his or her
country on the United
States and there will always be some
truth to that they're not going to limit
it to the truth part they will excuse
their own mistakes but but you know what
that does to the United
States it isolates the United States it
makes the United States the number one
candidate for the label rogue
nation the one who doesn't play fair the
one who doesn't be helpful to us our
enemy and that's going to show up right
away the latest statistics show that an
enormous decrease in tourism from
Canadians is now the reality as people
make reservations in Canada for a summer
vacation you know a week by the lake or
a trip to the Grand Canyon or some
they're not doing it and they're not
coming south from Canada out of a
protest against Mr trump's threat to
make Canada the 51st
state you the cost of what he is doing
the risks he is taking
my my my I think historians will look
back on this and say as I
do the economic problems of this country
must have been
extraordinarily profound to generate a
government desperate enough to take such
enormous risks for a chance that is
really small for all of this to work out
richard you mentioned it's going to be
so much difficult to get
back and how about we've learned that
China is going to replace the United
States with Canada in terms of providing
oil to China and soybeans with Brazil if
the things change the way that they're
talking about do you think how difficult
that would be for the United States to
get back how much difficult that would
be are these countries going to change
their new sort of trades and get back to
the old system is is there anybody
concerned in the United States about
that or they're just thinking of
whatever is in whatever is in their mind
well you know that's the question the
rest of the world is asking just that is
a question that half the people in this
country are asking where is the
opposition and the
opposition I have to be
honest the the the dominant part of the
Democratic party is stunning by its
silence Mr biden says hardly a word Mr
obama says hardly a word in fact the
only thing I've seen recently of Obama's
is him coming to the defense of Harvard
University
uh but not you know dealing with these
econom so I think the rest of the world
is seeing very little in the way yet of
opposition to the the end of a
commitment to free trade and the shift
to economic nationalism which is what
all of this amounts to um even Bernie
Sanders and Alexandria
Kaziocortez their trip around the
country which is impressive and drawing
big crowds seems to be focused on
hostility to
oligarchs okay I understand that that's
that's correct we have an extreme
inequality of wealth and that is
certainly a social issue for many
people but there doesn't seem to be a
major critique of the economic strategy
so you're left with the feeling that if
the Democrats come in yeah they will be
different they won't you know they won't
have Elon Musk firing hundreds of
thousands of federal employees
uh but you know even there they're not
the attack is weak and the attack is is
doesn't get much press it it's
extraordinary it is ext it's as if
everybody is holding their
breath waiting to see if Mr trump can
get
enough going that it becomes politically
dangerous to critique him and since it's
not yet
clear we're still in the you know we're
only three months into his presidency
uh the usual
political people don't say
much for a fear of being premature or
some so at this point there's not much
opposition and so to answer your
question foreign leaders and foreign
populations are beginning to get the
idea that what Mr trump is
doing is not the
pecularity of Mr trump not even the
peculiarity of the Republicans but is
some
national
agreed change in the United States and
since these things are hurtful to every
other country then you're setting up
that the United States is going in a
direction that it is willing and able to
hurt you when it needs it most of the
rest of the world thought of the United
States for the last 70 years as being
the superpower that
presides over the world economy keeping
it going the way it has we have the same
what was the phrase they liked a
rulesbased international order yeah okay
translate the United States makes sure
everything happens this way and you
could at least rely on that you cannot
anymore that's what the world is
learning the United States has
difficulties and is willing to try to
fix them
by behaving in a way that used to be
considered unacceptable
i mean our president announces he's
taking a part of the sovereign country
of Panama he's taking a part of the
Denmark they own Greenland he's thinking
of taking Canada he's think this this is
a reversion to old style
colonialism you know and he's he allies
himself with Mr
netanyahu as if to say we're prepared in
the United States to be as
outrageous in terms of
global rules of behavior as the Israelis
are in bombing
Gaza this this is extra this this is
extraordinary moment for the United
States to do that
there are a dozen different solutions in
the Middle East that could be worked out
between the Israelis and the
Palestinians and the United States could
be as it has been in the past trying in
some way to broker something that might
be acceptable to both
sides but instead it's choosing to line
up behind Mr
netanyahu first Biden does it trump does
it so the rest of the world understands
the United States granted other
countries say something but don't do
much to stop it i understand that a lot
of hypocrisy around the world but at
least they say something the United
States cannot bring itself to say
something even the Canadians are now
saying something but not the United
States and that you have to understand
what that symbolizes to the world as it
happens right
now no other country has imposed tariffs
on everybody else that's an absolutely
unique act of hurting every other
country letting the world know we are
going to hit anyone are you a poor
country in Africa uh I know one of them
in a little country in the south called
Leoto which has I believe tariffs in the
neighborhood of 40 or
50% this is a desperately poor African
what are you doing and the amount of
trade between Loto and this country is
trivial there is no he needs to show
every he there is no
limit well you know it's a little bit
like Mr netanyahu in Gaza i'm going to
do break every apartment building i'm
going to bomb the hospitals
okay you are telling us
something and we're not stupid we We see
what you're
doing and we the United
States are going to be behind you in all
of this this is really charming but but
you have to understand the United
States brands itself a religious country
uh our government right now is is a
government supported in a fundamental
way politically by uh fundamental
Christians particularly not only but
particularly well you know the Christian
committed government is treating
immigrants in a way that no Christian
morality that I'm aware of would
sanction would the poor i mean do you
treat God's creature your fellow human
being this way throw them out of the
country after they've worked here for 20
years put him in a jail that is famous
for its
cruelty what
Christianity is that
about well they manage it and that's a
sign that people are
desperate because they don't I don't
believe they want that i believe those
fundamental Christians believe what they
say about the
Bible but they are not turning the other
cheek they are
not recognizing everybody is equal in
the eyes of God none of
that they are behaving in a way that
clashes how they live with it i don't
know
but the rest of the world is watching
and drawing the conclusions and the
United States is going to have to live
with
them this this behavior this punishing
China the Chinese Navy is not patrolling
our waters the US Navy is patrolling
them china doesn't have military bases
all around the uh United States the
United States does have them all around
China i mean who's aggressive here and
who
isn't my
goodness even Americans lost as they are
in the endless repetition of these
mistaken notions of what's going on even
they begin to see through it and you
know it's very dangerous when you do
something as a government even if it's a
domestic thing and people see through it
that opens the space for people to begin
to wonder about all the other things
you've been telling them if you're not
trustworthy
millions of people have been affected
already by the wholesale dismissal of
federal employees in this country by
Elon
Musk they've been hurt their families
have been hurt the communities in which
they live have been
hurt they were all told it has to do
with efficiency
but you know two minutes of thought you
will understand that to make something
efficient you have to take some time to
really study it to see how it none of
that was done you just came in and fired
huge numbers of people cut the
budgets
wow all right that's still a small
percentage of our people but they're now
talking to other people and thinking
they've been abused here they've been
fired even though they've been doing
their job for 10 years no one had a
critique everyone understood what they
were doing
i like to explain to people that in the
1960s we had two and a half million
civilian employees in the federal
government now before Mr musk did his
thing we had 2 and a2 million people
civilian employees of the federal
government our population is 100 million
larger but the same number of federal
employees are taking care of a 100
million more people that's usually
called efficient that's what efficiency
means they'd be last place you'd go to
worry about efficiency given their
record this is an ideological war
undertaken by desperate people trying to
hold on to a United States capitalism
that is dissolving under them and
they're very frightened which I
understand
and they're desperate which I
understand but they're they're acting
out their
desperation in ways that are not they're
not smart they're not thought through
they're not likely to work and they take
enormous risks this is a very dangerous
situation i'm reminded when I was a
teenager I wanted to be a lifeguard
during the summer and I had to take a
course at the YMCA about how to be a
lifeguard and the first lesson was when
someone is drowning when someone is in
water over their head and they can't
manage it you have to be very careful
how you approach them because they are
desperate and don't really know they're
looking for something to hold on to and
if it's you and you're not you don't
know how to do it you will be dragged
down and we'll have two people who drown
instead of one and with the first and
you know all of us young men and women
we were very impressed that's where we
are only it's the country that's
drowning and we have to be very careful
not to be drowned along with it
richard the case of Europe and European
countries is of concern because with the
war in Ukraine and we know that how hard
the war and the conflict in Ukraine has
hit Europe and its economy and with the
new people wanted some sort of a
political change we know what has
happened since then you know in Germany
they didn't achieve anything
france United Kingdom name it and with
the war in with the with China with this
economic war with China it seems that
the situation going to worsen the
situation going to get worse and do you
see any sort of wisdom on the part of
Europeans to deal with that or they're
going to get along with whatever comes
from Washington in terms of the fight
between the two parties United States
and China
well I must say uh as a person you know
both of my parents
uh were Europeans uh I'm I was born in
the United States but my father was
French born in France my mother in
Germany
um for me it's the end for you europe
was in many ways a kind of center of the
world whether you started ancient Greece
and the Roman Empire the medieval time
the colonialism when Europe literally
took over the rest of the world or in
large
parts this is a
sad
decline a tremendous
decline and the ironies here are very
rich
capitalism emerged in Europe in a close
relationship with
nationalism the capitalists funded the
nationalists so that for example the
Austrohungarian Empire collapses be in
part because
Hungarians become attached to their
nationality as
Hungarian and that was more important
than the empire Austro Empire they were
part of and Germany likewise and these
countries were put together around
nationalism and it
enabled a marriage if you like of
nationalism and capitalism to overthrow
feudalism feudalism was held together
Europeanwide by the Roman Catholic
Church and that comes out of the Roman
Empire the history of Europe is a
history of
nationalism bringing
capitalism to the dominant
position and so the here's the irony
it's their
nationalism that is now drowning their
capitalism they can't get together they
cannot uni they cannot work out a common
policy the French don't trust the
British neither of them trust the
Germans the Italians are yet in another
place the Spanish instill another
place there you know the Spanish have
been welcoming immigrants the rest of
Europe has been expelling immigrants you
know Italians have are playing with
fascism the French don't want to go
there the Germans don't know what to do
with their uh economic miracle having
disappeared
you know the Germans love to tell
themselves about what they call in that
country the miracle of economic growth
or development but now they're in
recession as I speak to you and and in
deep trouble and the British
well catastrophic what they did and look
look how desperate they got they didn't
blame the Chinese the British blamed the
Europeans and broke away in Brexit right
10 years ago they broke
away as if Europe was their
problem
ridiculous a level of stupidity that
that boggles the
mind and they all know it now too
because you know by 10 years later
looking back wow was that a mistake
all
right the only thing worse than that was
the fact that after World War II they
became slavishly subordinate to the
United States not only could they not
get together but they all competed to be
beloved by the United
States the British had an advantage
English but they all competed
and then you have this Ukraine war in
which the United
States gets them to join in a renewal of
the Cold War the communists were gone in
1988 you know it's over the
USSR you now have another more or less
capitalist
regime that wants to participate in some
way in Europe you don't let them you
freeze them
out cuz you're stuck in the late 20th
century you you can't get out of this
mentality and so you fight a war that
devastates the economy of
Europe and still you require the leaders
to act as if the United States is
our beloved
leader no matter how much you destroy
us this is
pathological at this point you you're
watching Europeans digging their own
grave as we proceed they can't get
together they can't they are being
separated now by the United States which
will pick them off one after the other
in order not to lose all of Europe they
will make deals with whoever and the
Europeans are afraid any of them to
speak up because then the United States
won't pick them we'll pick one of the
other ones look at the reception of
Melan going to Washington versus Starmer
going to Washington and Starmer comes
you know on his knees
begging maloney is more what we want to
do i mean this is the end this is the
end europe cannot find its way it's
embarrassing every new
technological breakthrough is either
coming from the United States or from
China doesn't come from
Europe you know and and now the Chinese
will be trying to sell in Europe but
they can't sell here they will bring the
price down the Europeans don't know what
to do uh what are they going to do buy
it from the United States no they're not
going to do
that or maybe they will maybe they will
become even more
subservient but let me tell you the
American problem isn't going away and
allowing yourself to be the whipping boy
allowing yourself to be damaged by a
United States in trouble invites the
United States to do more of that so be
very careful
german companies cannot afford the
energy price that you have in Europe so
they've moved production to the United
States they will continue to do that if
not to the United States somewhere else
and the Chinese will make them offers it
will be very hard to
refuse and you're going to see the
Chinese doing what the United States
does
finding
cooperative governments in Europe with
whom to make a deal and
then goods can be exported from China to
I'll pick a country
Hungary and then in Hungary they can be
a little bit further processed i mean
like put a red stripe of paint on
something and then ex export it to where
to the United States because the import
duty on Hungary is low and so the
Chinese goods can come to the United all
of that is now being
organized it will be it's already
underway it always has been underway
sanctions don't work for that reason
boycotts tend not to work for that
reason and tariffs are not immune to the
exact same
procedure so maybe the United States
will have to punish all the country it
started already punishing the countries
that do business with China
all that does now is isolate the United
States the United States makes
international trade more
expensive more difficult and that will
not help the United
States very very dangerous route road we
have entered onto
yeah
thank you so much Richard for being with
us today let let me say one more i don't
want to leave people in a depressed
state i don't I don't want to tell you a
story if if you want the happy news
about how everything's working out then
please go to your regular uh mass media
your newspapers they they'll give you
lots of encouraging good news but if you
want to understand where we really are
then programs like Nima's here are the
are the place to go because these are
the places where these kinds of
conversations are allowed are encouraged
and we need it more than ever
thank you Richard great pleasure as
always take care bye-bye bye-bye
